LIBRARY -— ^ 




PEAS OF NEW YORK 



BEING 



VOL. 1-PART 1 



OF 



VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



STATE OF NEW YORK EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 



THE 

VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



BY 
U. P. HEDRICK 

ASSISTED BY 
F. H. HALL 
L. R HAWTHORN 
ALWIN BERGER 



REPORT OF THE 

NEW YORK STATE AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION 

FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 30, 1928 

$* 
RK 



HI H- 






ALBANY 

J. B LYON COMPANY, PRINTERS 

1 928 



NEW YORK AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION 

Geneva, N. Y., December 10, 1928 

To the Board of Trustees of Cornell University: 

Sirs. — I have the honor to transmit herewith manuscript and illustrations 
for Part I, Volume I, of The Vegetables of New York. This is the first installment 
of a work in three volumes to be entitled The Vegetables of New York authorized 
to be prepared and printed by the New York Agricultural Experiment Station in 
Chapter 514, Laws of New York, 1925. The manner of printing is provided for 
in section 2 of the Act just named as follows: 

" The said volumes shall be illustrated with colored plates of the various 
vegetables, contain appropriate text and scientific references, and the printing 
in every way shall conform to previous volumes of the fruit books published by 
the said station. Each volume shall consist of two or more parts, each of said 
parts to treat of a group of related vegetables. These parts may be prepared and 
printed separately." 

The present plan, a tentative one, is to publish the three volumes in thirteen 

parts. From time to time manuscripts and illustrations for the remaining eleven 

or more parts will be sent to the printer without further formal letters of 

transmission. 

Respectfully submitted, 

U. P. HEDRICK 

Director 



PREFACE 

This is Part I, Volume I, of The Vegetables of New York, a work authorized 
to be prepared and printed by the New York Agricultural Experiment Station in 
Chapter 514, Laws of New York, 1925. In object and scope The Vegetables of 
New York does not differ from the seven volumes published by this Station on tree 
and small fruits. The treatment necessarily differs somewhat, for, because few in 
number, a volume was published on each of the hardy tree fruits of this region, and 
another volume on the several small fruits; whereas, more than a half- hundred 
vegetables must be discussed in the three volumes now begun. The most noticeable 
difference in treatment is that cultural accounts are not given for any of the 
vegetables, while the culture of the several fruits was given in the volumes devoted 
to them. To take space to tell how each of the vegetables are grown would lead 
the authors far out of the bounds of three volumes, valuable as the matter might 
be, both from the historical viewpoint and from that of the vegetable grower. 

The reader of this preface will want to know in what order the several vegetables 
will be discussed in these three volumes. Present plans are tentative, but it is 
now planned that the contents of the three volumes will be about as follows : 

Vol. I 
Part 1 Peas. 
Part 2 Beans. 

Part 3 Cucumbers, Squashes, Pumpkins, Muskmelons, Watermelons. 
Part 4 Corn. 
Part 5 Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Shallots, Chives. 

Vol. II 
Part 1 Tomatoes, Peppers, Egg Plants. 
Part 2 Lettuce, Chicory, Endive, Salsify. 
Part 3 Celery, Celeriac, Parsnips, Carrots, Parsley. 
Part 4 Asparagus, Rhubarb, Okra, Pot Herbs. 

Vol. Ill 
Part 1 Cabbage, Cauliflower. 

Part 2 Brussels Sprouts, Collards, Kale, Kohl-rabi, Chinese Cabbage, Borecole. 
Part 3 Beets, Chard, Spinach. 
Part 4 Mustard, Cress, Radish, Horseradish, Turnips, Rutebaga. 

As in the volumes on fruits, the aim is to make The Vegetables of New York 
a more or less complete record of the development of each vegetable, not only as 
grown in New York, but as grown in the United States. Briefly, the botanical 
status of each vegetable is given; full horticultural descriptions of species and their 
varieties have been made; and as complete a history of the evolution of each 
vegetable is set forth as will show the reader its past and the present standing. 

The considerations which govern the selection of varieties for full description 
and illustration in this work are: (1) Value of the variety for commercial and home 
growers of vegetables; (2) Probable value of new varieties; (3) To furnish data 
for the vegetable breeder by setting forth new characters and showing range in 
variations; (4) Many sorts are described because of their history to thus better 



VI 



PREFACE 



show what the trend of evolution has been with this or that vegetable; (5) To 
indicate the relationships of both species and varieties. 

The chief value of the three volumes of The Vegetables of New York lies in 
the discussion of varieties. In the descriptions of all of the varieties, the aim is 
to give as tersely as possible an idea of all the characters of the varieties described. 
With very few exceptions technical descriptions of varieties are original and are 
made by those who have taken an active part in the preparation of this book. 
All of the vegetables having full descriptions have been grown on the Station 
grounds, with the exception of a few sorts of historical interest, but, whenever 
possible, specimens and varieties from this locality have been compared with 
those growing elsewhere. 

Far less prominence is given to synonyms for leading varieties in these volumes 
on vegetables than in any of the books on fruits which have preceded ; since syno- 
nyms for vegetables are many times greater than for most fruits. The synonyms 
will be found, not under each variety as in the fruit books, but collected for groups 
of varieties and printed but once, in small type, at the end of the chapter on 
descriptions of varieties. In the main, only such references are given as are of 
use to the writers or thought to be of possible use to some future student of the 
vegetable in hand. 

The botany of some of the vegetables discussed is very complex, not well 
agreed upon by botanical writers, and in some cases impossible to set forth at this 
late date in the evolution of vegetables. The Vegetables of New York is to be 
considered, as were the fruit books, a horticultural rather than a botanical work. 
Yet it is the desire of the authors to set forth the botany of each vegetable as 
thoroughly as may be. It will be a disappointment if the botanical discussions 
do not simplify and make plainer the botany of many vegetables. 

Varieties of vegetables in The Vegetables of New York are being described 
with other ends in view than identification and statement of value to the cultivator. 
In particular, it is the desire of the authors that the characters of all of the varieties 
described be so set forth that the plant breeder may make use of the descriptions. 
It is supposed, as a working thesis at any rate, that plants have characters, call 
them elementary-characters or unit-characters as you will, which are more or less 
independent entities thrown into various relationships with each other in the 
varieties of species. Thus, before the plant breeder may say, " We must combine 
such and such characters in varieties and species," he must know what these 
characters are. 

In the preparation of the present installment of The Vegetables of New 
York, the names of those who have taken part in the work appear on the title page. 
Changes and additions to these names will be made in prefaces to subsequent 
parts. This statement of authorship, however, does not do justice to one of them, 
F. H. Hall, who, from start to finish, in the field and in seeing the publication 
through the press, has taken a leading part. The writer, as senior author, can 
claim little more credit than for the conception of the work, plans for presenting 
material, oversight of illustrations, and for the brief chapters on the history of 
the pea. 

U. P. HEDRICK 

December 28, 1928 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK. I 



LEGUMES, CUCURBITS, CORN, ALLIUMS, ASPARAGUS 



PART I: PEAS 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER TEXT 

Preface.. 

I. History of the Garden Pea 

II. Systematic Botany of Peas and their Allies. 
III. Descriptions of Varieties: 

General Notes 

Extra Early Group 

Tom Thumb Group 

Marrowfat Group 

Alaska Group 

Scimitar Group 

Dimpled-seeded Group 

Wrinkled, Cream-seeded Group 

Gem Group 

Large-podded Dwarf Group 

Advancer Group 

Stratagem Group 

Champion of England Group 

Ne Plus Ultra Group 

Telephone Group 

Senator Group 

Edible-podded Group 

Field Peas: Classified List 

Undescribed Varieties; List 

References, Names and Synonyms 

Bibliography 

Index 



PAGE 




V 




3 




10 




19 


22, 


83 


33, 


86 


34, 


87 


38, 


89 


42, 


91 


43, 


91 


51, 


95 


57, 


98 


60. 


100 


66, 


104 


67, 


106 


69, 


106 


70, 


107 


73, 


109 


76, 


113 




78 




82 




115 




116 




124 




127 



ILLUSTRATIONS F page° 

Lincoln: White flowers and forming pods 14 

Sugar: Bi-colored flowers and colored stem-nodes. . 15 
Harrison Glory: Much whitened, deeply clasping 

stipules 18 

Types of Pea Pods 19 

Types of Pea Pods 24 

Types of Pea Pods 25 

Extra Early and Alaska Types: Typical vines and 

pods 36 

Late Alaska: Leaflets in 6s, tendrils slender 37 

Horal: Pods at top of plant 40 

Improved Telegraph: From imported seed; not 

acclimated 41 

Superb: Dwarf dimpled-seeded 50 

Allan Canner: Curved-podded, cream seeded 51 

Green Admiral : A leading canners' pea 54 

Little Gem: Well-known, old garden variety 55 

Duke Delight : A plump-podded type 60 

Canners' Gem 61 

Sutton Excelsior : A favorite old pea 64 

Advancer: A leading canners' pea 65 

Dwarf Defiance: A Stratagem-type pea 74 

Giant Sugar: An edible-podded type 75 

Openshaw: Vine and pods of field pea 86 

Johnson Glory: Stocky stem, dark foliage, large 

flowers 87 

Goldfinder: Very large stipules and prominent 

tendrils 112 

Types of Pea Seeds 113 



CHAPTER I 
HISTORY OF THE GARDEN PEA 



Of the many legumes used as human food, the garden 
pea is one of the commonest and most varied, and is as 
delectable and as nutritious as any. These attributes 
of a vegetable usually indicate an ancient origin. In 
the case of the garden pea, its domestication is so ancient 
that its wild prototype has never been found, either 
because it no longer exists or because in its evolution 
the modern pea has become unlike its ancestor of several 
thousand years ago. Despite its unknown origin, the 
main facts in the history of the garden pea, as associated 
with agriculture, ancient and modern, are well known, 
although its culture until a few hundreds of years ago 
was confused with that of the field pea with which, no 
doubt, it has been hybridized since the remotest culture 
of the two types. 

There afe many unmistakable records of garden 
peas in the writings of the old Greeks, in the bucolics 
of the Romans, in the voluminous herbals of a few 
centuries ago; while modern garden writers have given 
this vegetable as much attention as any other esculent. 
It could hardly be expected that at this late date one 
could add much to the long and oft -repeated story of the 
pea. In any history of the pea, brief or otherwise, the 
annals as recorded must be accepted essentially as they 
are found. About all that seems necessary in the chapter 
in hand, in view of the many accounts of the evolution of 
peas in print, is an attempt to set forth such facts as will 
serve as a background to make accounts of species, 
groups, varieties, and characters in succeeding chapters 
more easily understood and more usable. 

No one knows, nor is it probable that any one will 
ever discover, from what particular source in plant or 
territory the garden pea originated. Botanists and 
plant explorers have many times found spontaneous 
specimens of Pisum in the Old World which they thought 
might have been the plant from which cultivated peas 
came, but further study in every case has shown that 
the supposed parent was the offspring of garden plants 
relapsed into wildness, rather than vestiges of a parent 
stock. Just as we do not certainly know the indigenous 
originals of most of the cereals, of sorghum, sugar-cane, 
corn, peanut, yam, sweet potato and many other of the 
plants with which husbandmen are most concerned 
through immemorial cultivation, so we shall probably 
never be able to identify the garden pea with its wild 
original. 

Botanists do not even agree as to whether garden 
peas are derived from one, two, or several wild species. 
Nor can it be told where are the habitats of all of the 
several species conjectured by one or another of the 
writers on Pisum as probable ancestors. The ancients 
did not distinguish carefully between peas, beans, 
lupines, vetches, chick-peas, and lentils, each with their 
several kinds, and thus created a vast field for conjecture 



in historical and linguistic studies of these several pulses. 
The modern student who wishes to study the evolution 
of the pea must begin at an early and plain landmark in 
its history and travel from there. But first we must 
assign the garden pea a place in botany and separate it 
from its near of kin, the field pea. 

Garden peas, it will be found in Chapter II dealing 
with the botany of esculent peas, seem to fit, according 
to present knowledge, best into the collective species 
Pisum sativum which may be divided conveniently 
into six sub-species. Of these sub-species but two are 
of importance to cultivators: namely, Pisum sativum 
hortense, the supposed progenitor of the garden pea; 
and Pisum sativum arvense, from which field peas 
are supposed to have been evolved. Until very recently, 
and even by some botanists now, the garden pea was 
supposed to constitute the species Pisum sativum; 
other botanists place garden peas as derivatives of Pisum 
elatius. 

No one can say whether the pea described by the 
Greek and Latin writers was the garden pea or the field 
pea. Probably Ruellius in 1536 was the first naturalist 
to distinguish between the two and he none too plainly 
so far as characters are concerned. His simple state- 
ment is that there are two kinds of peas; one the field 
pea which is a trailing plant, and the other a climbing 
plant whose fresh pods and peas are eaten. Brief as 
this characterization is, botanists and gardeners following 
Ruellius have kept the two types distinct as either species 
or sub-species. Probably until the last three centuries, 
or for a much lesser time, the terms garden and field 
peas would suffice to distinguish the classes of cultivated 
peas for most of those who grew the two kinds, and they 
are still the only names known by some growers. How 
may the two sub-species be distinguished horticulturally? 

The garden peas, of which there are now several 
hundred varieties, have white flowers. The seeds are 
round and smooth, wrinkled or indented; and creamy 
yellow, or bluish green. The vines are dwarf, half- 
dwarf, or tall; leaf axils usually green or unpigmented. 
Garden peas are tender to cold, heat, and drouth. This 
sub-species may be divided into two well-marked groups 
for culinary purposes: shelling peas of which the seeds, 
green or ripe, alone are eaten and the pods of which split 
open at maturity and are lined on the inside by a thin, 
hard membrane; and edible podded or sugar peas 
of which the pods are sweet, tender, not ' ' parchment- 
lined," and do not become dry and split at maturity. 
Some botanists put these groups in separate species or 
at least in two sub-species. 

Field peas, to which are ascribed comparatively 
few varieties, bear colored flowers with standards usually 
purple or lavender, the wings of deeper red or even 
purple, and the heel greenish. The pods are smaller 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



than those of garden peas and are never edible. The 
seeds are angular or roundish and gray -brown, gray- 
green, gray-yellow or speckled with dots of various 
colors. The vines are trailing or less stiffly climbing 
with strongly pigmented leaf-axils, are hardier to cold, 
heat, and drouth and the seeds germinate at a lower 
temperature than do those of garden peas. The seeds 
of field peas may be used for human food but are usually 
grown for farm animals and the vine is often cured for 
forage. 

The descriptions given garden and field peas in the 
preceding paragraphs are those assigned them in botani- 
cal texts. As the varieties of the two groups are grown 
in gardens and fields there is much overlapping of char- 
acters: There are purple-blossomed garden peas (mostly 
edible -podded ; dwarf field peas; and seeds and pods are, 
in one or another character, mutually interchanged on 
the vines of what probably when men domesticated them 
were quite distinct types. Rogue plants, year in and 
year out. hamper the work of seedsmen in their attempts 
to keep varieties of the two peas true to type. Typical 
plants of long-established varieties in both sub-species not 
infrequently mutate and bring forth characters belonging 
to the other group. One is led to suspect that either the 
garden and field peas as delimited by the botanists have 
been developed from one wild original; or, and much 
more probable, the descendants of two original wild 
plants have been many times hybridized in the process 
of producing new varieties. 

As has been said, plants of the garden pea have 
never been found wild. The converging evidence 
of the several methods utilized in discovering and 
proving the origin of species, however, seem certainly 
to show that this sub-species of Pisum sativum had 
its origin in eastern Europe and western Asia. To try 
now to delimit the exact area in which it grew when men 
first began to cultivate it would be speculation pure and 
simple. It is possible that botanists may yet find it in 
its wild habitation : or it may be that it is a modification 
of the field pea, Pisum sativum arvense, with which 
many experimenters have found that it readily crosses. 
In that case the habitat was a vast area in southern 
Russia and southern Europe where the field pea is said 
still to grow wild. It is certain that the garden pea is 
an early introduction in northern Europe and Asia and 
as far west as England or east in China. 

The place of origin of the pea, however, is of small 
importance. It is much more to the point to the culti- 
vator to know that this vegetable has been grown by 
man under artificial conditions for thousands of years 
and to know how much the plant has been altered since 
men first recorded it as a garden esculent. 

Pickering says: "Of culinary vegetables, Pisum 
sativum is the only kind that can with certainty be 
traced back to the Stone Age." 1 He does not give an 
authority for the statement but presumably it came 
from some one of the explorers of the Swiss lake villages 



of the Stone Age. His authority may have been Heer 
for De Candolle says Heer found the garden pea among 
the relics of the Stone Age at Morssedorf, Switzerland, 
and also that the same explorer found it in the Bronze 
Age in both Switzerland and Savoy.- At any rate, 
almost certainly, the culture of the pea is prehistoric in 
Europe. One may well assume that the cultivation of 
peas and all related pulses came into cultivation among 
the earliest of cultivated plants, — coevals of the flour- 
yielding cereals. Certainly the pea offers many advan- 
tages which all primitive men must have sought in wild 
foods and they must have been disposed to cultivate 
this vegetable in the first timid attempts at agriculture. 

In primitive ages hunters and graziers must have 
used the edible seeds of wild pulses as a common source 
of food supply. From the wild it is but a step to rude 
cultivation, and the pulses must have been among the 
most prominent of all esculents in early times for 
artificial extension: The seed can be kept through 
several seasons and carried far; the season of growth 
is comparatively short; cultural requirements are not 
difficult; they afford food as nourishing as any other 
plants and for both men and animals; and, probably, 
early cultivators observed that the pulses thrived on 
fallow ground, soils too poor for cereals. No doubt 
these regions and periods were in the Stone and Bronze 
ages when scarcity of animals forced a meatless diet, 
times when the pea and related pulses, rich in protein, 
must have become as now in vast areas of the Old World 
chief substitutes for meats and fats; must have been 
necessities without which the human race might easily 
have perished from the earth. 

De Candolle writes that there is no indication of 
the cultivation of garden peas in ancient India or Egypt; 
but Sturtevant says the pea in India goes back to a 
remote period as shown by its Sanscrit name, and that 
the discovery of its seed in a tomb at Thebes proves it 
to have been an ancient Egyptian plant.' Sturtevant 
does not give authorities for the two statements. 
Gibault, without citation, gives Piddington as an 
authority who believed the pea was cultivated in ancient 
India under the Sanscrit name harenso as well as under 
several other names. 4 De Candolle thinks Piddington 
refers to modern and not to ancient India.' It does 
not seem from available evidence that there is proof of 
several statements found in the histories of plants that 
this pea was cultivated in early times in India. 

Nor does there seem to be probability that the 
species early cultivated in Egypt was Pisum sativum 
var. hortense or var. arvense. Pisum sativum 
eiatius grows spontaneously and is more or less culti- 
vated in Egypt, and probably it was this pea that was 
found in the tombs at Thebes, as it has been in recent 
years in other tombs in the delta of the Nile. Truth is, 
in all reports of discoveries of the pea in ancient places, 
whether through the finding of seeds in ruins, or by 
application of names from the dead languages, it is 



^ckering. C. Chron. Hist. Pis. 451. 1879. - De Candolle, A. Orig. Cult. Pis. 329. 1882. 

on Edible Plan t- 441. 1919. ' Gibault, C. Hist. Leg. 343. 1912. Ibid. 330. 



Sturtevant's Notes 



HISTORY OF THE GARDEN PEA 



almost impossible to say what pea or pulse is meant. 
Thus, a reference is found in the Old Testament to 
pulse in which David in the desert is " brought beds, 
and basins, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, 
and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentils, and 
parched pulse." 1 But what pulse? Possibly a pea 
since neither a bean nor a lentil, but what pea? Or, 
was it a vetch or lupine? It is useless to speculate. 

Before going further it may be well to say a few 
words about names of the peas. The early Greek writers 
confused the pulses under the names orobos, erebin- 
thos. and pisos, but Theophrastus is definite in the use 
of these names: orobos is the vetch: erebinthos, the 
chick-pea: and pisos is the common pea. Etymologists 
connect pisos with the root pisere, to pound, to stamp. 
By this name the pea is not, some say, described 
as a product that should be ground or stamped; but, 
rather, as a product of the operations named so 
that the name pisos may have first been applied to 
pebbles, gravel, or hailstones. Other etymologists 
believe the word to have come from the name of the 
operation and was given because only ripe seeds were 
used and these were thrashed by stamping or flailing. 
When the Greeks took the pea to Rome, pisos became 
pisum, a name eventually passed on to the English as 
peason, then pease or peasse; the English mistaking 
these words for plurals dropped the " s " and pea 
became the universal name among English-speaking 
people for this vegetable. 

No botanist nor student of the early history of 
plants seems to have thought there was any possibility 
of the garden pea, nor any related peas, having come 
from central or eastern Asia since wild prototypes are 
not found in that vast region; and because Chinese 
records very definitely place its entrance into China 
at so late a date as the end of the Sixteenth Century 
when it was known, and still is, as the Mohammedan 
pea. Besides, that marvelous food-plant, the soy bean, 
grows wild in many parts of eastern Asia and has been 
cultivated in China and Japan from the remotest times 
in these ancient countries, and has furnished fats, butter, 
and cheese without costly and wasteful intervening 
farm animals to the Orientals. 

That the garden pea and several related species of 
pulses were cultivated by the early Greeks is certain 
but it is now impossible to separate the pea from other 
pulses in the writings of the Greeks since they seemed 
to have used names interchangeably for peas, lentils, 
chick-peas, lupines and vetches. Theophrastus, who 
died 287 B.C., in his Enquiry into Plants, devotes 
Chapter VIII to cereals and pulses in which the pea 
appears in the list of pulses; directions are given for 
sowing; we are told peas, beans, and chick-peas come up 
with several leaves; the plant in leaf, stem, pod, and 
seed is described; it is said that grubs occur in peas 
whenever the crop gets too much rain and hot weather 
supervenes; and much general information is given in 
regard to the nature, uses, and culture of pulses. It is 



apparent from this discussion of peas by Theophrastus 
that this vegetable had long been widely and commonly 
grown in Greece both for human consumption and for 
fodder, yet the plant is not described exactly enough 
so that one may say whether this common pulse of the 
Greeks was a field or a garden pea. Small matter — 
even botanists in our own time confuse the two — and 
it suffices to state with certainty that an edible pea was 
cultivated by the most ancient Greeks who left records. 

To ascertain the origin of any cultivated plant in 
Europe and to study its history, one turns at once to 
Theophrastus, Father of Botany, and the author of the 
oldest treatise on botany extant. But in making use of 
Theophrastus, the reader must be reminded that the 
old Greek must not be regarded as a Father of Gardening, 
entitled though he is to paternity in botany, nor even 
the distinction of being an early practitioner in growing 
garden plants. Theophrastus wrote at a time when 
gardening, farming, orcharding, and the cultivation of 
flowers and medicinal plants were far advanced, when all 
food plants derived from the Old World had been named, 
domesticated, had their varieties and had been culti- 
vated for many centuries. He was writing in an ad- 
vanced stage of agriculture and civilization; quotes 
other books about plants and had much of his informa- 
tion from predecessors whom he looked upon as ancient 
as we look upon him as belonging to an age long, long ago. 

We should expect, therefore, and do find that 
Theophrastus writes of the pea and other pulses as if 
all Greeks knew them and had long known them — 
without ascribing to them the novelty in point of history 
that an American writing today of the products of the 
New World would have to do in discussing corn, potatoes, 
beans, pumpkins, and other plants domesticated from 
the flora of the western continents. We have from 
Theophrastus, then, an account of the pea as it existed 
in Greece, an ancient vegetable three centuries before 
the Christian era. 

It is not possible to determine when the cultivated 
pea was taken to Rome. If it was grown in the time of 
Cato (149 B.C.) or of Varro (27 B.C.), greatest of early 
Roman farm writers, the name pisum seems not to 
have been used, and if the pea was cultivated in the time 
of these Roman farmers it was under some general names 
then as now pulse, or legume. But in the first cen- 
tury of the Christian era the pea was well known by the 
Latins and is mentioned by Columella and Pliny as it 
was by Virgil in the century before Christ. 

It is certain, however, if one may judge from the old 
farm writers, that the pea was of less importance to the 
Latins as a vegetable than the chick-pea, lupin, bean, 
and the vetch. The reason for its neglect probably was 
that the climate of the Mediterranean countries is a 
little too warm for the pea, a vegetable which grows best 
in cool temperate regions. 

But while the pea was relatively unimportant in 
southern Europe it was one of the commonest and most 
grown vegetables in cooler climates of northern Europe 



2 Samuel, XVII. 28. 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



for use in the ripened state. Its culture was considered 
in every early gardening or agricultural book published 
in any language of middle and northern Europe. It 
would seem, from the early accounts of the pea on the 
continent, that in the Dark and Middle ages this crop 
was grown almost as commonly as any of the cereals, — 
that is, was a chief resource against the frequent famines 
and a prominent article in the diet of armies, navies, 
and commercial shipping. Today, beans and potatoes, 
introduced from America, have largely taken the place of 
peas as a winter food in European countries. 

The pea was an early food resource of Britain; in 
1066 it was one of the chief crops grown in England. 
According to Rogers, peas are frequently mentioned in 
the " Expenses of Collegiate and Monastic Houses " 
between the years 1403 and 1538. 1 He cites as many 
as sixty -one entries of pottage or porridge peas. It is 
interesting to note that in these two centuries, so com- 
mon were peas, that " pottage " and " porridge " meant 
peas. Thomas Turner, 1577, in A Hundred Good 
Points of Husbandrie, mentions yeas and peason 
several times. Gerarde in his Herbal, 1597, gives the 
first statement of the kinds of peas in England in his 
day. He says: 

" There be divers sorts of Peason differing very 
notably in many respects. Some are of the garden and 
some of field, and yet both counted tame. Some with 
tough skins or membranes on the cods, and others have 
none at all, whose cods are to be eaten with the Peason 
when they are young, as those of Kidney Beans; others 
carry their fruit on the top of the branches, and they 
are esteemed and taken for Scottish Peason, which is 
not very common." 

Gerarde enumerates the following sorts: 

1 Pisum majus Rounceval Pease). 

(2) Pisum minus (Garden and Field Pease). 

(3) Pisum umbellatum (Tufted or Scottish 

Pease i . 

(4) Pisum excorticatum ( without skins in the 

cods). 

Every British book on vegetable gardening from 
Gerarde down to the latest out of press discusses about 
every aspect of pea culture and describes varieties. 
A few quotations from the most noted garden writers 
will serve to show the evolution of the pea. Skipping 
80 years from Gerarde to John Worlidge's Systema 
Horticulture, or the Art of Gardening, 1677, we 
find the following very good description of peas grown 
in the last half of the Seventeenth Century. 

" Of Pease 
" Pease are of divers kinds, and some of them the 
sweetest and most pleasant of all Pulses; the meaner 
sort of them have been long acquainted with our English 
air and soil; but the sweet and delicate sorts of them 
have been introduced into our gardens only in this 
latter age. 



" There are divers sorts of Pease now propagated in 
England, as three several sorts of Hotspurs, the long, 
the short, and Barns's Hotspur, Sandwich, five sorts 
of Rouncivals, the Grey, White, Blew, Green and Maple 
Rouncival. Three sorts of Sugar Pease, the large white, 
small White, and Grey Sugar Pease. The Egg-Pease, 
Wing-Pease, and Sickle Pease; whereof the Hot -spurs 
are the most early, pleasant and profitable of all others. 
The Sugar Pease with crooked Cods, the sweetest of all. 
The large white and green Rouncival and the great 
Egg Pease we shall more particularly advise to be propa- 
gated in our Gardens. 

" The Hot-spurs are the speediest of growth of any, 
that being sown about the middle of May will in six 
weeks' time return ripe again into your hands, no 
vegetable besides being so quick in its growth and 
maturity; therefore let these be the first that you sow; 
if sown in February or March they will come earlier than 
any other sort sown before winter ; but if you sow them 
in September, and can by Fences of Reed, or otherwise, 
defend them from extream Frosts, you may have ripe 
Peascods in May following. 

" The large Sugar Pease (which many take to be a 
fair white sweet Pease succeeding the Hot-spur, but 
erroneously) is a tender Pease planted in April, and, 
ripe after midsummer, the cods are very crooked and 
ill shaped, which being boyl'd with the unripe Pease in 
them, are extraordinary sweet. The greatest discourage- 
ment in raising these, is that their sweetness attracts 
the small birds unto them, to their total destruction, 
unless carefully prevented ; which is a sufficient argument 
of their pre-excellency. 

" The large white and green Rouncivals, or Hastings, 
are tender, and not to be set till the cold is over, and then 
not very thick, for they spread much and mount high, 
and therefore require the aid of tall sticks, every one 
knows the worth of them. 

" There is another very large grey but extraordinary 
sweet Pease, that is largely propagated, it is tender but 
very fruitful, and deserves a large bed in your kitchen 
garden." 

Names of varieties of vegetables seem to have 
counted for but little in the seventeenth century for at 
its end, 1693, John Evelyn, most admirable writer on 
gardening of his times, in his The Compleat Gardener, 
dismisses varieties of peas with this naive discussion: 

" Peas or Pease, are multiplied only by seed; 
there are great Ones, little Ones, white Ones or 
yellow Ones, and green Ones. All the world knows 
they grow in Cods, and are almost round, and sometimes 
half flat." 

It may be of most interest and profit in the further 
history of the pea to discover so far as possible the 
beginnings of the several groups of cultivated peas. 

Green peas and edible-podded peas. — The 
ancients seemed to have used only ripe dried peas as a 
food ; in the middle ages the green pods were cooked 
whole and all peas were therefore edible-podded; still 



'Rogers, J. Thorald. History of Agriculture and Prices in England. 



HISTORY OF THE GARDEN PEA 



later the pods were cooked whole, dipped in a sauce at 
the table, much as globe artichokes are now eaten, and 
the peas were licked out and the pod thrown away ; green 
peas, shelled from the pod and then cooked was the last 
step in the evolution of the pea as an esculent. Shelled 
peas were not much used in England until after the 
restoration of Charles II when they became a very popu- 
lar delicacy. Ripe peas shelled from the pod were 
commonly parched, fried, or boiled. Green peas were 
not common even as late as 1700 according to a para- 
grapher in Gardeners' Chronicle who says: 

" The taste for Green Peas appears to have been 
carried to great excess in the time of Louis XIV. Bonne- 
fonds mentions them in his Jardinier Francais, 1651, 
and describes them as the Dutch Pea, or Pea without 
shell : and adds, ' Until very lately they were exceedingly 
rare.' Roquefort says they were first introduced by 
M. de Buhl, the French Ambassador in Holland, about 
1600. The author of a Life of Colbert, 1695, says, 
' It is frightful to see persons sensual enough to purchase 
Green Peas at the price of 50 crowns per litron ' (little 
more than an English pint). This kind of pompous 
expenditure prevailed much at the French Court, as 
will be seen by a letter of Madame de Maintenon, dated 
10th May, 1696. ' The subject of Peas, continues to 
absorb all others,' says she; ' the anxiety to eat them, the 
pleasure of having eaten them, and the desire to eat 
them again, are the three great matters which have been 
discussed by our Princes for four days past. Some 
ladies, even after having supped at the Royal table, and 
well supped too, returning to their own homes, at the 
risk of suffering from indigestion, will again eat Peas 
before going to bed. It is both a fashion and a mad- 
ness.' " 

The name " peascod " was equivalent to our present- 
day " pea-pod," and a rhyme in the time of King Henry 
VI ran: 

" Were women as little as they are good, 

A peascod would make them a gown and hood." 

Gerarde in 1597 mentions Pisum excorticatum 
(without skins in the codsi, which no doubt was the 
prototype of the sans parchemin pea still commonly 
grown on the continent but little used in Great Britain or 
North America. Edible-podded peas differ much more 
in their pods than those from which the peas are shelled. 
This is to be expected as, of course, they have been 
selected for their pods. 

White, yellow, blue, green, gray, and spotted 
peas. — None of the ancients distinguish ripened peas 
by the color of the seeds, and Dodonaeus in his Frumen- 
torum, 1566, was probably the first writer to distinguish 
between the colors, and names white, yellow, green and 
gray peas. Parkinson, 1629, adds spotted peas to the 
colors. He says: 

The kindes of Pease are these; 
The Rounciuall. The gray Pease. 

The greene Hasting The white Hasting. 
The Sugar Pease. The Pease without skins. 

The spotted Pease. 



The Scottish or tufted Pease, which some call the 
Rose Pease, is a good white Pease fit to be eaten. 

The early or French Pease, which some call Fulham 
Pease, because those grounds thereabouts doe bring 
them soonest forward for any quantity, although some- 
times they miscarry by their haste and earlinesse." 

Black-eyed peas. — Townsend, an English seeds- 
man in 1726, is probably first to mention the black-eyed 
pea. He gave the variety the name by which it is still 
known, though but rarely grown. Black-eyed Marrowfat. 

Round and wrinkled peas. — Probably Tragus 
in 1552 was the first writer to mention wrinkled peas. 
Wrinkled peas are also recorded in Belgian and German 
gardens by Dodonaeus in his Frumentorum, 1566. 
In his description of P/sum magus he says: " The dry 
seed are angular, uneven, of a white color in some varie- 
ties, of a sordid color in others." Pena and Lobel, 1570, 
describe the same pea as grown in Belgian and English 
gardens, and Lobel in 1591 illustrates wrinkled peas 
under the name Pisum quadratum. The Great 
Peason, Garden Peason, or Branch Peason of Lyte, 1586, 
is probably a wrinkled pea as he gives Dodonaeus' name 
as a synonym. Ray, 1686. describes wrinkled peas 
under the name Rouncival, and refers to Gerarde's 
picture of Pisum. majus or Rowncivall Pease in 1597 
as being the same. Lisle, 1708, gives a good description 
of a wrinkled pea which he calls " honey -combed or 
pitted." Thomas Andrew Knight, however, was the 
first to bring wrinkled peas into general esteem. 

Knight began his work of hybridizing this vege- 
table in 1787 by which he obtained Knight's Green 
Wrinkled and White Wrinkled Marrow peas. The 
parents, according to Knight's account of his work in 
the Philosophical Transactions for 1799, were round 
white and gray peas, tall and dwarf, in which the 
wrinkled character had not appeared before. Corre- 
lated with the wrinkled skin is rich, sweet, tender flesh, 
and great productiveness. Thus Knight's Wrinkled 
Marrows became at once a great acquisition both to 
consumers and cultivators of peas and soon varieties of 
tall and dwarf, early and late wrinkled peas became the 
most popular table peas in gardens and on markets. 
It is surmised by some that this remarkable wrinkled 
character in peas is a mutation and that there was no 
record of wrinkledness in peas before Knight's work; 
yet, as has been shown, a wrinkled pea existed before 
Knight made his crosses, and in his account of his 
experiment from which came the first named wrinkled 
pea Knight says: " In this experiment I used the 
farina of a White Pea which possessed the remarkable 
property of shrivelling excessively when ripe." 

Dimpled peas. — About the middle of the Nine- 
teenth Century a new type of pea appeared, one having 
a round seed with compressed sides or even a slight indent 
in the sides henceforth to be known as dimpled peas. 
Early Green Marrow and Tall Green Marrow are 
among the earliest dimpled peas. 

Tall and dwarf peas.— Varieties of peas ranging 
in height of vine from four to twenty-four inches are 
grouped as dwarf sorts; those from two feet to four feet 



8 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



as half-dwarfs; from four to eight feet as tall sorts. 
The peaa of the early gardeners, herbalists, and botanists 
were probably tall peas, because in nearly every case 
ill which cultivation is mentioned it is stated that stick- 
ing is required. Camerarius in 1586 divided peas into 
Pisam mains and Pisum mJnus. Probably this is 
the first instance in which a botanist distinguished 
between tall peas and half-dwarf peas. True dwarf 
peas are first mentioned by Tournefort in 1700, although 
he refers back to their existence in 1665. It is possible 
that a pea called Middle Peason in England in 1591 
is a half-dwarf. 

Straight-podded and scimitar-podded peas. 
One assumes from the literature that the peas of the 
ancients and those of the first centuries of its cultivation 
in northern Europe were straight -podded. The first 
direct reference to the scimitar-podded pea is found in 
Worlidge, 1683, in a description of Sugar pease with 
crooked cods, and in 1686 Raj' mentions a " Sickle 
pease." Two years later in 1688 there is a fuller descrip- 
tion of these Sickle pease in the Art of Gardening which 
is quoted on p. 6, not only because of its account of 
the Sickle pease but of various other sorts as well. 

This sketch of the evolution of the garden pea must 
not be closed without naming the men who have done 
most to improve modern peas, nearly all of whom are 
Englishmen. The first and the most noteworthy pea 
breeder was Thomas Andrew Knight whose experiments 
with peas were carried on during the last decade of the 
eighteenth century and the first quarter of the nineteenth. 

Knight discovered in 1787 a degenerate pea growing 
in his garden at Chelsea, England, and pollinated it 
from the blossoms of a gray pea. There were enormous 
progeny, most of which grew luxuriantly and gave peas 
of greatly improved character. Using these two peas 
for parents for several years he produced in turn Knight's 
Tall Green Marrow and Knight's Dwarf Green Marrow, 
two sorts from which some say have come all modern 
wrinkled peas. Knight's work stimulated other breeders 
and during the first half of the nineteenth century 
improved wrinkled sorts were introduced by so many 
breeders that seedsmen and gardeners could hardly 
test and keep track of the nomenclature of the introduc- 
tions. Horticultural societies found it necessary to 
carry on trials to straighten out the nomenclature of the 
pea. Of these trials those of the Royal Horticultural 
Society published results in 1845, 1860 and in 1872 
which did much to bring the nomenclature of this 
vegetable in order. 

In 1822, John Goss, resident of Devonshire, pub- 
lished a remarkable paper in the Horticultural Society's 
Transactions giving an account of the work he had done 
in hybridizing peas in which was noted most of the 
phenomena later discovered by Mendel which formed the 
basis of Mendel's theories. Goss, unfortunately, did 
not make the interpretation of the principles now asso- 
ciated with Mendel's name, nor seek an explanation of 
his results in hybridizing as did Mendel. None of 
Goss' new peas can be named as landmarks in the 
evolution of this vegetable. 



If one puts the introduction of valuable varieties 
as a criterion of worth in improving peas, perhaps the 
palm of merit should go to Dr. McLean of Colchester, 
England, who made his first crossing in 1850 and there- 
after for many years introduced one variety after another 
that became standards of his time. Dr. McLean's 
aim was to produce early dwarf wrinkled peas. Of 
these Little Gem was the best known in America and 
may be taken as the type with which this hybridizer 
worked. 

Thomas Laxton followed McLean, taking the latter's 
varieties as a basis for his experiments, but widened his 
endeavors to produce peas earlier, of larger size, such as 
filled the pod, and to keep the height of vine moderate. 

Other prominent breeders of the last half of the 
nineteenth century were Henry Eckford, noted improver 
of sweet peas, and W. Culverwell who bred the giant 
podded sorts of which Telegraph, if not the first, was the 
most noted and was the forerunner of most of the large 
podded sorts that have followed. Telegraph, Telephone, 
Stratagem and Duke of Albany, among the giant podded 
sorts introduced at this time, are still grown in American 
gardens. 

Of the several famous English seed houses which 
sought to popularize the new peas of these breeders and 
contribute new sorts of their own breeding perhaps the 
firm of Sutton & Sons did most. Mr. Martin Y. Sut- 
ton, speaking in 1897, records that the chief objects in 
mind in the breeding work carried on by his firm were to 
replace the small hard round-seeded tall -growing sorts 
with peas of dwarf growth which would produce large 
pods filled with wrinkled peas, having the marrowfat 
flavor. Of the many admirable peas sent out by this 
firm Sutton Excelsior and Magnum Bonum were best 
known in the United States and are still largely grown 
many decades after their introduction. 

Carter & Company and Hurst & Company, other 
English seedsmen known the world over, helped to 
distribute these noteworthy varieties from the hands of 
the English breeders and contributed sorts of their 
own to the trade. A full history of the pea could not 
be written without devoting more than one page to 
the plant improvers named and to seedsmen who by 
hybridization and selection have so vastly improved 
the pea. 

Peas were brought at an early date into the New 
World as may be seen from the following references cited 
by Sturtevant. 

" Peas were early introduced to the American 
Continent, but, in notices of this plant, the word peason 
refers sometimes, it is probable, to beans. In 1493, 
peason are mentioned by Peter Martyr as grown at 
Isabella Island by Columbus; in 1535, peason are 
mentioned by Cartier as grown by the Indians of Hoche- 
laga, now Montreal; and in 1613, peas were obtained 
from the French traders grown by the Indians of the 
Ottawa River; in 1540, peas are mentioned in New 
Mexico by Alarcon and ' small, white peas ' by Coro- 
nado; in 1562, peason were cultivated by the Florida 
Indians, as related by Ribault. In 1602, peas were 



HISTORY OF THE GARDEN PEA 



sown by Gosnold on the Elizabeth Islands off the coast 
of Massachusetts, according to Smith; in 1629, in 
Massachusetts, there was a ' store of green peas,' 
• as good as ever I eat in England,' growing in the 
governor's garden, according to Rev. Francis Higginson. 
In 1614, peas were mentioned by Smith as grown by the 
New England Indians. In 1690, Bancroft says Spanish 
peas were grown by the Indians of Mexico, and in 1775, 
Romans says green peas were obtained the year round 
at Mobile, Alabama. In 1779, Gen. Sullivan's expedition 
against the Indians of western New York destroyed the 
growing peas of the Indians who occupied the territory 
near Geneva." 

Most of the peas grown in America are varieties 
which originated in England, where, at any rate until 
recently, pea-breeding has received much more attention 
than on this side of the Atlantic. Still many admirable 
varieties are of American origin: as Landreth Extra 
Early, East Hartford Extra Early, Ferry First and 
Best, Rural New Yorker, Pedigree Extra Early, Rice 
Extra Early, Lightning Excelsior, Extra Early Market, 
Dexter, Maud S., Alaska, Klondike, Winner, Nonpareil, 
Hustler. Horal, Rice No. 330, American Wonder, Old 
Glory, New Era, Nott Excelsior, Dwarf Perfection, 
Dwarf Telephone, Blue Bantam, Surprise, Canners Gem, 
Canners Perfection, Allan Canner, Horsford Market 
Garden, Admiral Dewey, King of the Dwarfs, Eclipse 
(wrinkled), Potlatch, and many other varieties of tem- 
porary or local distribution. 



The histories of these American peas, with others 
of lesser note, are traced in the discussions of varieties 
and form an interesting contribution in the history of 
American vegetables. 

This brief sketch of the pea in America should not 
close without noting the names of some of the men and 
companies who have been or are now seeking to improve 
peas: David Landreth, John H. Allan, Chas. Arnold, 
A. B. Cleveland, Rogers Bros., N. B. Keeney, Wilbur 
Brotherton, F. H. Horsford, D. M. Ferry, Richard 
Nott, Geo. Starr, E. J. Delwiche, W. Atlee Burpee, 
Robt. Buist, Jas. Vick and many too little recognized 
breeders, selectors and guides in roguing who have been 
associated with the wholesale growers of seed peas. 

To illustrate the advance made in the improvement 
of the pea since Gerarde's Herbal in 1597 the number of 
varieties listed by garden writers may be given. Gerarde 
numbered four sorts, all of which probably correspond 
to groups of modern peas. Parkinson, 1629, names 9 
kinds; in 1683, Meager, 9 kinds; in 1765, Stevenson, 
34 kinds; in 1778, Mawe, 15 kinds; in 1807, Miller, 
17 kinds; in 1859, Thompson, 36; in 1883, Vilmorin, in 
France, 149. In the United States McMahon in 1806 
names 22 kinds; in 1824, Thorburn, 24; in 1863, Burr 
described 72 kinds; in 1884, the New York Agricultural 
Experiment Station 93 varieties; in this text more than 
1,000 are listed. Of these varieties, 350 are now com- 
pletely out of cultivation; and 110 have been grown 
only in tests or to a very limited extent. 



CHAPTER II 
SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF PEAS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



The leguminous plants, constituting that large and 
varied assemblage known botanically as the family 
Papilionaceae, are of prime importance economically 
as sources of lumber, dyes, forage and food. 

The particular group of legumes considered in 
Part I, the peas and related plants whose seeds, pods, 
or both are at present of more or less importance as food 
in the United States, belong almost entirely in a single 
tribe of this family, the N i<ia<-. 

Aside from the peanut, irachis hypogaea L., the 
food plants of the other tribes except the Phaseoleae. 
the beans and their allies (which will be discussed in a 
following part*, are unimportant and merit but short 
notice. 

Loin- tetragonolobus L. (Tribe: Loteae). The 
" asparagus pea " is occasionally cultivated in central 
Europe and in the Orient. The seeds and pods are eaten 
green, or the seeds alone are occasionally used dried or 
roasted. The immature pods of L. edulis L. are some- 
times used like string beans by the peasants of Crete. 

Scorpiuras vermiculata L. (Tribe: Hedysareae). 
The caterpillar or wormlike pods of this plant are said 
to be used " in soups as a practical joke, not for their 
edible qualities." The fruits of S. suhvillosu L., S. 
sulcata L. and other species are used in the same way. 

taenia L. Sp. PI. 741. 1753. (Tribe: Hedy- 
sareae 

Herbs: leaves pinnate with two pairs of leaflets or trifoliolate, 
stipules adnate to the petiole: inflorescences axillary: flowers sessile 
or short-stalked with two narrow bracts below the calyx: calyx 
tube long filiform simulating a pedicel, dilated above and campanu- 
late at the insertion of the petals and stamens, teeth 5. the upper 4 
united, the lower free: standard orbicular, wings oblong, keel 
recurved: stamens 9 or 10, all united; ovary at the base of the calyx 
tube, ovules 2-3, styles filiform. 

There are 9 species, natives of tropical South 
America; the following is now cultivated in all the 
warmer countries. 

\. hypogaea L. Sp. PI. 741. 1753. 

Peanut, goober, pindar; Erdnuss (Germ. ); arachide, 
pistache de terre French i ; pistacchio di terra Ital.). 

Annual, about 1 foot high, branched from the bottom; leaves 
paripinnate, with two pairs of obovate entire leaflets; fruit — through 
the rapid lengthening of the pedicel, which is very short at first — 
deeply buried and ripening in the soil: seeds ovate, 1-3. 

This has become a very important plant. The 
" nuts " are eaten and sold almost everywhere. An 
excellent oil is extracted from them which competes 
successfully with olive oil, as it keeps better and does 
not darken as readily. 

Peanuts are widely cultivated in Asia, especially 
in China. For some time it was even doubted whether 
the plant was really a native of America, but it was 
evidently in cultivation by the Indians before the 
discovery of America, the nuts having been found in 
the mummy graves of Peru. 



Tribe: VICEEAE Bronn Diss. Legum. 133. 1822. 

The tribe Vicieae, to which the peas and their allies 
belong, are (excepting the shrubby species of Abrus) 
annual or perennial herbs, erect or vinelike and bearing 
tendrils or short bristles i setae ) at the end of the pin- 
nately compound leaves. The flowers are all somewhat 
similar to those of peas and 9 of the 10 stamens are 
united in a tube, the 10th being free or nearly so. 

The following key includes those genera of impor- 
tance as food plants. 

KEY TO GENERA OF VICIEAE. 
A. Style glabrous; keel and wings free; staminal tube twice 
as long as the ovary; pod inflated, containing 2 seeds; fila- 
ments dilated above; leaves odd pinnate 1. Cicer (p. 10) 

AA. Style hairy: pod not inflated; leaves paripinnate. 
B. Staminal tube obliquely truncate. 
C. Calyx with 5 teeth; style filiform, hairy above; pod with 
two to several seeds; wings coherent with the keel. 

2. Vicia ip. 11 
CC. Calyx 5-parted; style flat, a line of hairs on the inner side; 

pod rhomboid, with 1-2 seeds 3. Lens (p. 12) 

BB. Staminal tube horizontally truncate. 

C. Style dilated or flattened, hairy along the inner side; wings 

nearly free 4. Lathyrus (p. 12) 

CC. Style canaliculate and bearded along the inner side. 

5. Pisum (p. 13) 

I. CICER [Tourn.l L. Sp. PI. 738. 1753. 

Plants herbaceous or suffrutescent, frequently glandular 
hairy; leaves either ending in a bristle or tendril or odd pinnate, 
leaflets mostly dentate; stipules oblique, dentate: peduncles axillary: 
flowers single or a few in a raceme, bracts small; calyx with 5 sub- 
equal teeth; standard ovate or orbicular, narrowed into a short 
broad claw; wings obliquely obovate, keel curved, obtuse or some- 
what pointed; ovary sessile, ovules 2 or more; pod ovate or oblong; 
the seeds globular or angular. 

This genus comprises about 14 species, all natives 
of western Asia and southern Europe, of which only 
the following is of importance as a food plant. 
Cicer arietinum L. Sp. PI. 738. 1753. 

Chick pea; Kichererbse (Germ.); pois-chiche, pois 
tete de belier, pois cornu, pois becu, garvance (French); 
cece (Ital. >; cicer (Rum.); garbanzo (Span.). 

Annual herb, 20-40 cm high, erect or ascending, branching 
from the base or in the upper part, glandular hairy throughout; 
leaves short stalked; leaflets mostly in 6-8 pairs — usually not oppo- 
site, oval to oblong, sharply serrate toward the tip, 8-15 mm long; 
stipules semi -sagittate, with 2-5 deltoid teeth; peduncles much 
shorter than the leaf, 1 -flowered, articulate in the middle and with 
a subulate bract: flowers about 1 cm long, purplish or pale violet 
or white; calyx with narrow lanceolate acuminate teeth exceeding 
the tube; standard with darker veins; pods on decurved pedicels, 
oblong-ovate, gibbous, ending in a curbed beak, viscid-glandular, 
15-20 mm long; seeds obovate or roundish with a short nearly 
straight beak. 

There are several varieties, probably forming two 
distinct races. The plants of the first race have violet 
flowers; here belong the following varieties: 
1> var. ralgare Jaub. & Spach. ///. PI. Orient. 1:83. 1842.— 
var. nigrum Alef. Oester. Bot. Zeits. 9:356. 1859. C. niZrum 
Hort. ex Alef. /. c. 
10 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF PEAS. AND THEIR ALLIES 



11 



Seeds black, impressed at the hilum. This is said to be the wild 
form. 
2) var. fusruni Alef. Bonplandia. 9:67. 1861. 

Seeds rather small, reddish brown, much impressed. 
31 var. rliytido.sperimim Jaub. & Spach. ///. PI. Orient. 1 :83. 
1842. — var. cruentum Alef. Bonplandia. 9:67. 1861. 

Seeds blood red, almost globular. 

The plants of the second race have white flowers; 
here belong the following varieties: 

41 var. sativum Beck, in Reichb. Ic. PI. Germ. 22:207. 1903. 
— Cicer sativum Schk. Hdb. 2:367. 1796. C. arietinum var. 
mocrocorpum Jaub. 8s Spach. Ann. Sc. Nat. II. 18:226. 1842. 
var. album Alef. Oester. Bot. Ztg. 9:356. 1859. C. album 
Hort., ex. Alef. I.e. 

Pods attenuate near the base; seeds white, slightly impressed. 
5) var. globosum Alef. Oester. Bot. Zeits. 9:356. 1859.— C. 
rotundum Jord. fide Alef. I.e. 

Seeds orange yellow, almost globular. 

Possibly native of western Asia; since remote 
times cultivated in all countries bordering the Mediter- 
ranean, in northern Africa as far south as Abyssinia; in 
Europe especially in Spain, southern France and Italy; 
and in America in all the old Spanish settlements; often 
escaped from cultivation and occurring as a weed in fields. 

It seems that Cicer was known to the Phoeniceans 
and through them came to Greece, Italy, and Spain; 
there is no indication, however, that it was cultivated 
in ancient Egypt, nor has it been found in the remains 
of prehistoric lake dwellings in Switzerland or elsewhere, 
like the pea and the lentil. 

The plant is glandular viscid all over and contains 
oxalic acid. It is used in southern Europe to poison fish. 

The seeds of Cicer are farinaceous and somewhat 
bitter; they are eaten boiled, roasted, or ground as 
flour for puddings and cakes or for thickening soups. 
They are especially esteemed in Spain and the Spanish 
settlements. 

In India the secretions of the plants are collected 
by spreading a cloth over them during the night, and 
the liquid thus obtained is used as vinegar or for forming 
a cooling drink. 

2. VICIA [Tourn.] L. Sp. PL 734. 1753. 

Erect, climbing or precumbent herbs, with leaves mostly 
ending in tendrils; flowers axillary or in peduncled one-sided racemes, 
varying from white to yellowish, pink, purplish or blue; calyx 
tube oblique at the base, teeth almost equal; petals mostly with a 
short claw, standard obovate and notched, wings obliquely oblong, 
keel attached to their middle, shorter, curved; ovary with two to 
many ovules; seeds various, globular to ovate or ± compressed. 

There are about 150 species, natives of the north 
temperate zone, a few also in South America. The 
only important species cultivated as a vegetable is the 
Broad bean — Vicia Faba. 

Vicia Faba L. Sp. PI. 737. 1753.— Faba vulgaris 
Moench, Meth. 150. 1794. Faba Faba (L.) House, 
N. Y. State Mus. Bull. No. 254. 457. 1924. Broad 



bean, Windsor bean, English dwarf bean, horse bean; 
Puffbohne, Dicke-bohne, Saubohne, Pferdebohne (Ger- 
man); fava (Italian); feve, feverole (French). 

Annual herb, with erect, robust and fleshy 4-angled stem, 
glabrous throughout; stipules semi-sagittate, dentate, with a round 
dark spot; the leaf rachis ending in a short point; leaflets in 1-3 
pairs, not always opposite, ovate, obtuse, with a short point, some- 
what fleshy and glaucous; flowers 3-6 in short stalked racemes or 
clusters; pedicels short; calyx tubular, the teeth lanceolate, acute, 
less than half as long as the tube; standard obcordate, whitish, 
with purplish veins; wings shorter, with a long claw, white with a 
large round blackish spot; keel blunt, greenish, with a long claw; 
style bearded below the stigma; pod large and thick, broader near 
the end, swollen around the seeds, from 6-15 cm long, puberulous, 
at length becoming black; seeds 2-5, large and flat, imbedded in 
the spongy, soft inner coat and separated by spongy divisions; dull 
when ripe, mostly leather-colored or green to red brown, self- 
colored or spotted, with a large dark oblong hilum. 

Native country not known, probably the regions 
around the Caspian Sea according to DeCandolle and 
others. 

There are three varieties recognized: 

1) var. minor Peterm. FI. Lips. 549. 1838. 

Pods thin, terete; seeds 3-4, roundish, 10-13 mm long. 

2) var. equina Pers. Syn. 2:308. 1807.— V. Faba var. fi L. 
Sp. PI. 737. 1753. Faba equina Medic, Vol. Ch. Phys. 
Ges. 2:360. 1787. 

Pod thin, terete; seeds 4-5, thick especially near the hilum, 
oblong, angular. 

3) var. megalosperma Beck FI. Nied-Oester. 873. 1893. 
— Faba vulgaris var. megalosperma Alef. Bonplandia 9:101. 
1861. 

Pods short, broad, somewhat compressed; seeds 25-35 mm 
long, roundish, compressed and with concave sides, thicker around 
the hilum. 

Alefeld in his Landwirtschaftliche Flora (1866) 
gives a wide range of varieties or variety groups, and 
enumerates 42 of them to which he gives Latin names. 
The varieties exhibit differences in size, shape, and color 
of the seeds, and also in the color of the flowers. 

The broad bean is not much cultivated as a vege- 
table in the United States, and probably never will be. 
It mildews very badly here. 1 It is, however, much 
grown in Europe, although it is losing in favor there also, 
since it cannot compete with the kidney bean and be- 
cause the plants suffer greatly from aphis. 

The broad bean is one of the oldest cultivated 
plants; seeds found in Swiss lake dwellings have been 
attributed to the Bronze Age. It was grown by the 
Greeks, Romans, Hebrews, and Egyptians, and probably 
by other ancient nations. In Egypt, however, broad 
beans were considered impure and perhaps were eaten 
only by the poorer classes. The priests were averse to 
the beans and did not eat them at all. Broad beans 
have been known in China and Japan for a long time. 

None of the other vetches are important as vege- 
tables though many are excellent forage plants and are 



1 A few varieties, however, are offered occasionally by American seedsmen. Among those tried at this Station or reported as 
available are the following: 

I. Dwarf Fan-podded Types: Early Mazagan, Green Gem, Bell, and another small seeded form incorrectly called Frost Proof Lima. 
II. Broad Windsor Types: Colossal, Broad Windsor, Green Windsor, Bacon, and January Bean. 
III. Longpod Types- Early Longpod, Prolific, Seville, and Sword. 
The reader is referred to the Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society I «:160. 1918i for descriptions of nearly 50 varieties and 
to a later number of the same journal 18:74 1923 for a much augmented list and a classification of types. 



12 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



cultivated extensively. The seeds of a few species are 
or have been used as food occasionally; the more note- 
worthy being the following: 

\ i, i.. IrNili;. Willd., a forage plant of the Mediter- 
ranean region, the seeds of which may have been eaten 
but are considered unwholesome by Lewin. \ . monan- 
ih.is Desf. and \. narbonensis L. also forage plants 
from the same region are said to have been used occasion- 
ally as food: \ . pisiformis L. known by the French as 
•■ lentille du Canada," >. -;iti>;i L. "tare" or "white 
vetch," and \ . birsuta S. F. Gray are sometimes used 
like lentils or ground into a flour for various uses. 

3. LENS [Tourn.] Moench Meth. 131. 1794. 

Slender herbs; leaves alternate, usually ending in a tendril; 
leaflets entire, stipules semi sagittate; peduncles axillary, flowers 
small, single or few, racemose; cahx with long subequal teeth; 
similar to those of Vicia, the keel, however, acute or some- 
what rostrate; ovary subsessile, with 2 ovules; style curved, flat, 
bearded inside, stigmas small; seeds round, flat. 

There are 5 6 species, natives of the Mediterranean 
and western Asia. The following is of general interest: 

Lens esculenta Moench, Meth. 131. 1794. — 
Ervum Lens L.. Sp. PL 738. 1753. Cicer Lens Willd. 
Sp. PL .5: 1114. 1800. Lens vulgaris Delarb. FL Auv. 
ed. 2. 472. 1800. Lathyrus Lens Bernh., Syst. Verz. 
Erf. 248. 1800. Lens sativa Hell. FL Wire. 2:169. 
1810. Vicia Lens Coss. &Germ., FL Paris 143. 1845. 
LathyrUS esCUlentUS Grab. FL Oberschles. 214. 
1843. Lens Lens Huth, Helios. 11:134. 1893. Len- 
tilla Lens W. F. Wright, Cent. Diet. 5:3410. 1911. 
Lentil: Linse Germ, i ; lentille (French) ; lente, lentischia, 
lentilla (Ital. . 

Annual, 10-45 cm high, stem quadangular or almost alate, 
more or less branched from the base, sparingly hairy throughout; 
leaves short -stalked, the lower ones with 6, the upper ones with 
up to 14 leaflets and ending in a single or branched tendril; leaflets 
short stalked, narrowly elliptical, 1-2 cm long and 3-8 mm or more 
wide, obtuse, mucronate, green; stipules semi-sagittate, 6 mm long 
and 2 mm wide; peduncles usually shorter than the leaf, mostly 
2-flowercd, rarely 1-4 flowered; pedicels 4 mm long; flowers small, 
nodding. 7 mm long, standard roundish with purplish veins, keel 
with violet blotched point; calyx teeth narrow, exceeding the petals; 
pod rhomboid, about 1 cm long and 8 mm wide, somewhat inflated; 
seeds usually 2, flat, biconvex, with sharp borders, grayish brown, 
black, yellow, or reddish. 

There exist several varieties which seem to belong 
to two different races. The one race consists of low, 
hairy, early-flowering plants with bluish green leaves. 
Here belong the varieties: 

1 var. piim l.ilniii Alcf. Bonplandia 9:130. 1861. Seeds 

sulphur-yellow with 3-6 black dots. 

2 var. bjrpochloria Alcf. Bonplandia 9:130. 1861. Stems 

green below; seeds grayish brown. 
3. var. pilramimma Schur Entun. Pi. Tranas. 171. 1866. Plants 
very hairy. 

The plants of the second race grow higher and 
stouter, are decidedly green, less hairy, and flower later. 
Here belong the varieties: 

4 var. nigra Alef. Bonplandia 9:130. 1861. Standard blue; 
seeds small, black. 



5) var. vulgaris Gren. & Godr. Fl. France 1:476. 1848. 

Standard blue or white with blue veins; seeds whitish yellow 
or greenish yellow to brownish. This is the most commonly 
cultivated variety. In warmer countries this is sown in the 
fall, since it winters well and yields a large crop of seeds and 
straw. 

6) var. nummularia Alef. Bonplandia 9:130. 1861. — L. nwcro- 

SpermO Baumg. Enum. PI. Transs. 2:346. 1816. Seeds 
large, yellow, red or black. Grown during the summer only. 

7) var. disperma Rouy in Rouy & Foucaud Fl. France 1:205. 

1899. ErVUtn dispermum Roxb., ex Willd. Enum. Hort. 
Berol. 766. 1809. Lens esculenta B Sllbsphaerosperma 
Godr. Fl. Lorr. 1:172. 1843. Seeds much smaller, about 
1 3 of the type, rounded at the margin, brown and marbled. 
Much cultivated in France. 

The lentil is probably a native of eastern Asia, 1 
from Beluchistan and Afghanistan to southern and 
eastern Persia. It occurs, probably as a subspontaneous 
plant escaped from cultivation, through northern Africa 
and the Mediterranean parts of Europe. 

The lentil has been in cultivation from very remote 
times. Lentil seeds were found in the prehistoric 
dwellings on the Swiss lakes, in Germany at Schussen- 
ried, in Switzerland, Italy, and Hungary, and also in 
the ruir.s of Troy. It was cultivated to a large extent 
in Egypt and exported from there to Greece and Rome. 
According to Schweinfurth, the lentil was originally 
introduced to Egypt from Mesopotamia. 

4. LATHYRUS [Tourn. | L. Sp. PL 729. 1753. 

Low herbs or climbing by branched tendrils; stems often 
winged; stipules often semi-sagittate; leaves, mostly ending in 
tendrils; flowers solitary or racemose, frequently large and showy, 
yellow, white, pink, violet, or blue; bracts small, caducous; calyx 
oblique, 5-dentatc; standard large, erect, more or less orbicular; 
wings obovate like the obtuse keel, long clawed; ovary with 2 to 
many ovules; pod straight, compressed or terete; seeds ± globular or 
angular, with linear hilum. 

About 100 species, mostly inhabiting the Northern 
Hemisphere, a few extending along the mountains to 
tropical Africa and South America. 

Only the following species has been in general culti- 
vation as a vegetable: 

Lathyrus sativus L. Sp. PL 730. 1753.— Cicer- 
Cula sativa Alef. Bonplandia 9:147. 1861. 

Ax-vetch, chickling vetch. Deutsche Kicher, Kich- 
erling, Saat-Platterbse, essbare Platterbse, fahnerbse 
( Germ. ) ; gesse, pois breton, pois carre", garousse (French) ; 
Cicerchia bianca, Cesarella (Ital.). 

Annual, branching from the base, 30-70 cm high, glabrous; 
stems with 2 broad decurrent wings and 2 angles; stipules semi- 
sagittate, rather large, shorter than the petioles, about 2-7 cm long. 
4 mm wide; petioles winged, with 1 pair of leaflets, these linear- 
lanceolate, acuminate, up to 15 cm long and 3 9 mm wide with 3-5 
strong veins, somewhat glaucous; peduncles about as long as the 
petioles, angled, 1- rarely 2-flowered; pedicels equaling the calyx; 
flowers 1.5-2 cm long; calyx-lobes lanceolate, exceeding the tube; 
standard whitish and darker veined, pale pink or deep blue; keel 
greenish white; pod 3 cm long and 1.3 cm broad, compressed with 
two broad patent wings on the upper (ventral; margin; seeds 2-4 
rarely 1 or 5i, up to 12 mm broad and 16 mm long, flat, angular, 
flattened on one side, almost axe shaped, with a small narrow 
hilum, smooth, grayish brown, spotted with brown, or entirely 
white. 



I . ii- . -i nl, ni. i Schnittspahni Alef., a native of Asia Minor, is considered by some to be the source of the cultivated 
liffers from the typical form, except for the blue standard, and white wings and keel. The reddish seeds are minutely 
and densely spotted. The form'- bunalayenais, persiea, indiea, and abyseinica are very similar. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF PEAS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



13 



Mediterranean region of Europe and Africa, from 
Spain to Turkey, western and central Asia, often culti- 
vated as a forage plant and sometimes subspontaneous. 
There are several wild and cultivated varieties. 
The latter are: 

11 var. coeruleua Asch. & Graebn. Syn. mitteleurop. Fl. 6 2 :1004. 
1909. — Cicercula sativa COertllea Alef. Bonplandia 9:148. 
1861. Flower deep blue; seeds densely dark spotted. Culti- 
vated in Abyssinia i Native name " Sebberi " — A. Braun), 
and as an ornamental plant in Europe. 

2) var. coloratus Ser. in DC. Prodi. 2:373. 1825.— Cicerula 

sativa colorata Alef. /. c. Flowers whitish, with blue veins; 
seeds with bright spots. Cultivated as an ornamental, and 
for food in Abyssinia. 

3) var. albus Asch. & Graebn. Ac— Cicerula sativa alba Alef- 

I.e. Flowers and seeds white. Cultivated in Europe. 

The " ax-vetch " or " chickling vetch " has been in 
cultivation since very ancient times. Schweinfurth 
found seeds of it in Egyptian tombs; large quantities 
have been found in a cave in Hungary, and also in 
ancient Troy. 

It is now chiefly cultivated for forage. It is said 
to be superior to the common vetch but less productive. 
In some parts of Europe, as in France, Silesia, Italy and 
Spain, and also in Turkey and India, the seeds of the 
white form are often eaten like green peas or when dry 
like beans, in soup during the winter. The flour from 
this vetch makes a pleasant bread, but it is said to be 
unwholesome unless mixed with 3 parts of wheat or other 
flour. It is not cultivated in the United States as a food 
plant. The seeds are inferior to peas in taste, but are 
rarely infested with insect borers. 

Some other species of Lathyrus are or have been in 
use as food plants, and the following merit brief notice: 

Lathyrus Aphaca L., " Yellow flowered pea," 
the young seeds were occasionally eaten in England; 
the ripe seeds are said to be narcotic and to produce 
headache; native to southern Europe; L. Cicera L., the 
"lesser chick pea" or "vetch," a native of the Medi- 
terranean region, is sometimes grown for its seeds 
which are, however, said to be of inferior quality and 
sometimes unwholesome; L. maritimus Bigel., " heath 
pea," or " seaside pea," the seeds are bitter, but can be 
eaten and have been used in times of great need in 
England; L. montanus Bernh., " bitter vetch," 
" heath pea " or " mountain pea," a native of Europe 
and eastern Asia; the seeds are sometimes eaten; L. 
Ochrus DC, native of the Mediterranean region, it 
has been cultivated for its peas, and some believe that 
the peas found in Troy by Dr. Schliemann may have 
been of this species, though the seeds are bitter and diffi- 
cult to digest. 

5. PISUM [Tourn.] L. Sp. PL 727. 1753. 

Stems slender angular, soft and glabrous, green or more or 
less glaucous; leaves alternate, distichous, with one or several pairs 
of leaflets, the rachis ending in a simple or branched tendril or with 
a very short and rudimentary tendril only; leaflets opposite or 



alternate, the lower ones larger; stipules small in the perennial 
species or larger in the annual species, with the basal part much 
enlarged, clasping the stem; peduncles axillary, ± erect, 1-2 or 3 
irarely more) flowered; pedicels erect, patent or nodding, as long 
as the calyx; calyx obliquely campanulate, with 5 unequal, pointed 
lobes, the upper ones shorter and broader; standard roundish or 
broadly obovate, with two gibbous knobs at the base and contracted 
into a broad claw; wings ± falcately obovate, longer than the 
curved keel and adhering to it; ovary almost sessile, with several 
ovules; style curved, rigid, bearded on the inner side; stigma oblique, 
terminal; fruit a bivalved, linear, obliquely truncate and rostrate 
pod, with the calyx persistent at the base; valves generally perga- 
mentaceous when drying, reticulately veined, twisting when open 
ing; seeds several, =fc roundish or globular, smooth or verruculose, 
yellow, green or brown, unicolored or spotted. 

There are several species, natives of western Asia, 
the Mediterranean, southern Europe and northern 
Africa, some of them largely cultivated almost all over 
the world. 

The Index Kewensis lists a great many names, but 
recognizes only 7 species. Recent authors, however, 
agree that most of them are but subspecies of Pisiim 
sativum. 

KEY TO THE SUBSPECIES OF PISUM SATIVUM 
A. Flowers 16-20 mm long. 
B. Leaves with 1 pair of leaflets only. 
C. Stipules dentate often up to the top and also along the 
inner margin; peduncles shorter than the stipules. 

1) Pisiim sativum abyssinicum ip. 16) 
CC. Stipules dentate only near the base. 

2) Pisiim sativum Jomardi (p. 16) 
BB. Leaves with 1-3 pairs of leaflets; seeds globular, finely granu- 
late, brown, marbled with green. 

3) Pisum sativum syriacum (p. 17) 
AA. Flowers larger. 

B. Flowers colored; seeds ± brown. 
C. Stems and stipules not spotted with red; flowers large; 
seeds almost globular, finely granulate, dotted. 

4) Pisum sativum (latins ip. 17) 
CC. Stems and stipules spotted with a red blotch at the node; 
seeds ± angular, smooth, often ± spotted. 

5) Pisum sativum arvense (p. 17) 
BB. Flowers white; seeds yellow, yellowish or greenish, globular, 
or wrinkled and angular. 

6) Pisum sativum hortense (p. 18) 

Alefeld l and others believe Pisum sativum ela- 
tius to be the ancestor of P. sativum arvense. and 
that from the latter P. sativum hortense originated. 
While this may be quite possible, it would seem that 
P. sativum arvense must have existed as a distinct 
entity contemporaneous with P. sativum elatius; and 
that a similar entity probably existed for P. sativum 
hortense. These, together with other pea entities 
must have been derived from a common ancestor, 2 
which was very likely a perennial species, perhaps not 
much unlike the perennial pea, P. formosum. 3 Each 
of these entities in spreading over a large geographical 
area during the course of ages broke up into a con- 
siderable number of variously related races. 

These races are generally self-fertile and their 
offspring remain constant, but, doubtless, occasional 



1 Alefeld Landwirtsch. Fl 31, 45. 1866. 

- R. H. Lock found in Ceylon a wild pea, which he considered to be such an old, if not the, architype of the peas (Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond. B. 79. 28-34. 19071. There is, however, little evidence that Pisum can be a native of Ceylon. It is not known whether it is 
identical with Pisum sativum zeylanicum Alef. Landwirtsch. Fl. 45. 

Pisum formosum Stev. i Alef. Bonplandia 9:237. 1861. A perennial herb from eastern Asia, not introduced into cultivation. 



14 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



crosses between such races occurred spontaneously 
through the agency of insects. The individual races are 
separated by slight and often variable characters. The 
species, subspecies, or varieties which we more or less 
arbitrarily adopt for our convenience are composed of 
many such races. If extreme forms are singled out, it 
seems as if they could be considered as sufficiently 
distinct " species " but as soon as large numbers of 
specimens are taken into consideration no single char- 
acter proves constant and the supposed " species " 
may be segregated into an almost endless number of 
smaller races or strains. S. T. Wellensick ' admits 
concerning I'. sativum bortense, 1'. sativum arvense, 
I'. sativum elatius, and 1*. sativum Jomardii that 
there " are at least 500 constant strains, which after 
crossing iso far as they have been studied) produce 
invariably fertile hybrids. As recombinations are con- 
tinually being produced by crossing, it is evident that a 
division of the genus Pisum into a small number of 
species cannot stand the test of time. Therefore it 
would seem a rational proceedure to combine into one 
species all the cultivated forms of Pisum that are mutu- 
ally crossable." 

This was first done by Alefeld (Landwirtsch. 
Flora 1866>, who. however, gave Latin varietal names 
to all the 102 wild and cultivated varieties or races known 
to him. Ascherson & Graebener admit as subspecies 
V. sativum elatius, I'. sativum arvense, and I*. 
sativum hortense. There are, however, as is evident 
from what was said above, no clear differences between 
subspecies and it is not always easy to say with which 
subspecies a given individual plant should be classified. 
P. sativum elatius sometimes closely resembles P. 
sativum arvense; I*. sativum Jomardii seems to 
come very near to I'. sativum abyssinicum; and P. 
sativum syriacum approaches P. sativum elatius. 

Pisum fulvum is the only one of all the annual 
peas, so far known, that has sufficiently distinct char- 
acters to admit it to the rank of a species. 

Western Asia, from Syria and Asia Minor to the 
east, is the region where most of the forms of Pisum are 
to be found in a spontaneous, subspontaneous or culti- 
vated state. I'. sativum elatius has extended west- 
ward spontaneously into the Mediterranean region and 
southern Europe, and P. sativum ar\«-use exists in 
Italy as a wild, not as an escaped plant. 

The germination of the pea is subterraneous, the 
cotyledons remain included in the seed coat, which 
opens only enough to allow the young root and stem to 
grow. The root immediately sends out numerous 
smaller lateral rootlets. The stem is almost terete at 
first and bears two rudimentary or primary leaves, of 
w-hich the first one is subterraneous. The second leaf 
covers and protects the stem at the curved point with 
which the plantlet penetrates the soil. These first 
rudimentary leaves show clearly two lateral ovoid 
blades, corresponding to the stipules, and a narrower 
middle part, sometimes with a very small hooked point, 



evidently representing the petiole, rhachis, and tendril 
of the later perfect leaves. In many cases, later on, a 
lateral stem is produced from the axil of the upper 
rudimentary leaf. 

With the appearance of the leaves the stems become 
4-angled. Two of the angles run down from the 
midribs of the two stipules and one from the petiole. 
The angle of the latter covers two internodes. The 
stems are weak, soft, and hollow inside, and the inter- 
nodes are more or less flexuous. 

The leaves are distichous and alternate, i. e., they 
stand in two opposite rows, one above the other. Stip- 
ules are always present. In Pisum formosum, the 
only perennial pea extant, so far as we know, they are 
small. In the annual peas, subgenus Lophotropis, 
however, the stipules are much larger from the begin- 
ning; and though comparatively smaller on the lower 
leaves they reach a considerable size on the upper part 
of the stem and exceed the leaflets. The stipules are 
clasping, obliquely attached, the lower part often 
overlapping, and the outer margin dentate, at least 
near the base. The stipules form an excellent protection 
for the tender growing points of the plant and the young 
flower buds. In Pisum sativum hortense they are 
usually rounded at the top with a small cusp, while in 
P. sativum arvense they are usually more pointed. 

In Pi.su in formosum, the petioles are channeled 
on the upper side, have one pair of leaflets and terminate 
in a small cusp representing a primitive tendril. The 
channeled petioles and the small stipules seem to be 
very old characters, which in P. formosum remain 
constant while in the annual peas, these characters are 
observed only in juvenile plants and in the lower leaves 
which have a distinctly channeled petiole, a little 
longer than the small stipules and one pair of opposite, 
entire, or indistinctly toothed leaflets, usually notched 
and with the midrib mostly protruding into a small 
cusp. The petiole ends in a short primitive tendril, a 
few millimeters long, much resembling that of P. 
formosum. At about the 3rd or 4th leaf the tendril 
begins to lengthen and branch into 1-3 pairs of lateral 
branchlets; and, at the same time, the petioles become 
terete or almost so. Very rarely the tendril is not 
developed at all, as in the case of the remarkable variety 
" Acacia." This has four pairs of leaflets and a terminal 
odd leaflet, but no trace of a tendril. Rudimentary 
tendrils and channeled petioles, however, are found on 
the lowest two leaflets. 

The upper leaves of the annual peas are composed 
of 1-4 pairs of leaflets, which are rarely exactly opposite. 
They are rather uniform in shape, in most species, the 
lower leaflets the larger and the upper ones decreasing 
in size. They, like the whole plant, are soft, succulent, 
and more or less glaucous. The leaflets are folded or 
plicate in the bud. The margins may be entire or 
especially in the lower leaves, dentate. 

On the plants belonging to the subspecies arvense 
the internodes or points of attachment of the stipules 



S. T Wellensick, Genetic monograph on Pisum (Bibliographica genetica, 2:343-476. 1925). 










White flowers and forming pods 



LINCOLN 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




Bi-colored flowers and colored stem nodes 



SUGAR 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF PEAS. AND THEIR ALLIES 



15 



and leaves are marked by a narrow blotch of red. The 
red color sometimes extends to the back of the petioles, 
the angles of the stem, and to the points of attachment 
of the leaflets and their margins. This red blotch is 
an excellent and constant character of arvense and 
some of its allies. On dried specimens, however, it is 
not always obvious. 

The flowers appear with rather great regularity 
at the same internode in a given strain. In many 
varieties the first flower arises from the sixth leaf, rarely 
lower down, in others the first flower comes from a 
higher leaf. Flowers are then produced from every 
subsequent leaf-axil. 

The peduncles arise from the axil of the leaf between 
the stem and petiole. They are terete, hollow, and 
variable in length. At the time when the flowers open 
they are often scarcely longer than the stipules, but 
often continue to grow until they may greatly exceed the 
stipules. But the length of the peduncle offers little as 
a specific character, except in a few cases. 

There may be 13 flowers, or in the case of the 
Scottish or tufted Pea (Pisum sativum arvense 
umbellatum and Pisum sativum hortense coro- 
natum) which merely represents fasciation of the stem, 
as meny as 4- 5 flowers are produced on a single peduncle. 
The number of flowers, however, is not always character- 
istic, peduncles with 1 flower and others with 2 flowers 
may be found on the same plant, or a second flower may 
be found in a rudimentary state. Where one flower is 
produced the peduncle is prolonged into a kind of beak, 
often as long as the pedicel. This beak is the blind 
end of the peduncle, not a bract. Bracts are usually 
missing at the articulated base of the pedicel, though 
very small or obscure ones may be observed. 

When two flowers are developed on a peduncle 
there can be no beak at the lower flower, but the peduncle 
is prolonged and ends with a second pedicel, at the base 
of which a beak and, usually, bracts can be found. 
These bracts vary greatly in shape and size. They 
may be subulate or larger and somewhat foliaceous, 
roundish or ovate, entire or toothed, and about up to 
1 cm long, or they may be small and divided in various 
ways in the manner of the first rudimentary leaves on 
the germinating stem, or they may resemble two minute 
stipules. 

The flowers of the peas have a peculiar shape, 
familiar to everybody and characteristic of a large 
number of plants, the family of the Papilionaceae or 
Fabaceae, popularly known as the Pea Family. 

First of all the pea flowers are zygomorphic, i. e., 
they can be divided by only one line into two corre- 
sponding or symmetrical parts. The calyx is green, folia- 
ceous with a short green tube, somewhat oblique at the 
base, its 5 lobes, each with a deep green midrib, longer 
than the tube, and bilabiate. The upper lip consists 
of two larger, broader, and somewhat recurved lobes, 
while the lower lip is formed by three narrower and more 
acuminate lobes which point forward. The upper two 
lobes back the upper larger petal, the vexillum or stand- 
ard, while the three lower calyx lobes subtend the wing 



and keel petals. In bud the calyx lobes are arranged 
so that the upper two touch each other with their inner 
margins, while their outer or lower margins are covered 
by the two lateral lobes which in turn are subtended on 
their lower or inner margins by the lower and outermost 
fifth lobe. 

There are 5 clawed petals placed alternate to the 
calyx lobes. The uppermost, the " standard " or " vex- 
illum," is the largest. It is usually semicircular in 
outline, attached between the two upper calyx lobes. 
It is notched at the top in the middle and plicate or 
furrowed inside from the notch to the base and corre- 
spondingly keeled at the back. It is usually variously 
colored and finely veined, but in Pisum sativum hor- 
tense. it is pure white with fine green veins, and greenish 
towards the base. In bud the standard is folded and 
covers all the other petals. The base of the standard 
follows the direction of the calyx tube, but is then 
strongly bent upward. At this point the standard is 
thickened by two corresponding green callous crests 
inside which help to stiffen the petal and form an entrance 
to the honey chamber. These crests fit into depressions 
on each of the next two petals. 

These next two petals are called the " wings." 
Each has a narrow claw and is abruptly broadened above 
it, and has there the depression into which the crest of 
the standard fits, as was just mentioned. These depres- 
sions, however, are only the back of prominent knobs 
on the inner side, which in their turn are tightly fixed 
in depressions of the following lower petals. The blade 
of the wings is roundish and much smaller than the 
standard. In color the wings are also often different 
from the latter. The wing petals enclose the next 
two. 

These two last and lowest petals, " the keel " of 
the pea-flower, are grown together except at the base or 
claw. They form a kind of a hood or little boat which 
conceals the pistil with the style and the stamens. The 
suture of the two petals is sharp and somewhat winged 
like a keel. It is curved upward and ends in a rather 
acute point. At their base above the claw there are 
two deep holes into which the knobs of the wings tightly 
fit. This rather complex structure is much the same in 
most flowers of the Pea Family, and is correlated with 
the manner of cross pollination, which is mostly effected 
by bees and similar insects. 

Within the petals are the stamens and the pistil. 
The lower part of the stamens is united into a kind of 
tube around the pistil and almost as long as this. This 
tube is split at the top lengthwise, as only 9 out of the 
10 stamens are united, the upper (10th) being free down 
to its base. The free ends of the filaments are bent 
upward and densely packed together with the style in 
the pointed top of the keel. 

The pistil rises from the middle of the bottom of the 
calyx tube. At its base it is contracted into a stalk, 
then it is laterally compressed, obliquely lanceolate, 
the lower side usually straight, and the upper one more 
curved. It is formed by one carpel, the margins of 
which meet on the upper or inner side of the flower 



16 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



and bear there the ovules alternately attached to the 
two placentas. 

At the tip the pistil is acute and terminates in the 
Style, which is bent at a right angle, somewhat com- 
pressed or flattened and recurved toward the tip. 
Below the yellow stigma, on the inner side, there are 
a quantity of white hairs forming a brush to collect the 
pollen. 

If one presses the keel of a pea flower downward 
the stigma emerges from the keel and with it the pollen 
is brushed out abundantly. There is, however, some 
resistance of the keel to overcome and all students agree 
that pea flowers are very seldom visited by insects and 
that they are self fertile. The pollen is shed very early 
in the bud and comes immediately in close contact with 
the stigma and impregnates it. Nevertheless some rare 
cases of cross pollination have been observed. 

After pollination the pistil soon begins to grow. 
The calyx is persistent. 

In ripening the pod becomes papery and dry, and 
if left alone, it splits along the sutures, twists lengthwise 
and exposes and disperses the seeds. 

The seeds vary in size, shape, and color according to 
species and variety, as will be seen in the descriptions 
of the varieties. 
Pisam sativum L. Sp. PL 727. 1753. 

Stems rather robust, 0.30-1.00 m and more high; stipules 
large, semi-cordate, auriculate, more or less dentate on the outer 
side of the basal lobe; leaves pinnate, with 1-3 pairs of leaflets or 
rarely more, usually ending in a simple or pinnately branched 
tendril, pairs of leaflets not always opposite, leaflets entire or den- 
tate, mucronate: peduncles of various lengths, usually exceeding 
the stipules, 1-3 or more flowered; flowers 15-30 mm long; standard 
broad semiorbicular, notched at the top, at the base contracted 
into a claw, wings obliquely roundish, suddenly contracted into the 
claw, keel winged; pod 5-10 cm long or more; seeds several, globular 
or angular, greenish or yellowish or variously colored, with a narrow 
oval hilum. 

This species is composed of the following subspecies: 
1. Pisum sativum subsp. abj — Lnicum A. 

Braun i Alef. Landw. FL 43. 1866. — P. abyssinicum 

A. Braun Flora 21:269. 1841. 

Scarcely exceeding 45 cm 1 | feet ; stipules 4-5 cm long, almost 
as long as the internodes, ovate, obtuse, mucronulate, with semi- 
cordate, ± acute basal lobes, irregularly dentate almost to the top 
on the inner and outer margin, but the teeth longer in the lower 
outer half: petioles a little longer, with 1 pair of leaflets and branched 
tendrils; leaflets ovate, elliptical, or obovate, obtuse, mucronulate, 
sharply or incisely dentate except in the somewhat cuneate lower 
third, 3-4 cm long; peduncles ', -'. as long as the stipules, but in 
fruit as long or just exceeding the stipules, 1 flowered; flowers small 
', of those of subsp. arvense or bortensc . pale: calyx lobes 
narrow- lanceolate; standard only half open, whitish; wings shorter, 
bright or pale purple-red; keel shorter than the wings, narrow; 
pods 4.5-5 cm long; seeds 5 6, small, globular-cubic, brownish red, 
smooth and shining in Abyssinian specimens, or more grayish brown 
or grayish green and less shining in cultivated specimens. 

Abyssinia, cultivated on the mountains near 
Djeladjerranne Wilh. Schimper, No. 1886 FL and 
Frtg. Oct. 23. 1840.1 Native name: " Ein Ater." 

This seems to represent a rather outstanding sub- 
species or variety, although it is known only from culti- 



vated specimens. Its most prominent features are the 
strongly dentate stipules, the leaves composed of only 
one pair of leaflets, the short peduncles, and the rather 
small flowers. It seems to stand nearer to P. sativum 
elatius than to any other. The dried pods on her- 
barium specimens are of a dull dark purplish color. 

It was first grown in 1840 in the Botanic Garden at 
Karlsruhe-Baden by A. Braun from seeds sent by Wil- 
helm Schimper from Abyssinia. 

Seeds of a pea from Palestine, 1 with which Mr. 
A. W. Sutton experimented, were presented by him to 
this Station. However, but three of them germinated 
and only one grew into a weak plantlet, producing one 
small flower of an indistinct color. According to Mr. 
Sutton the flowers are " self-colored of a shade much 
resembling magenta." He further notes that the plants 
had " no colour whatever in the axils of the leaves or 
stems of the plants. Another striking character was 
that the pods of the Palestine pea were lined inside with 
a white woolly substance similar to that found in the 
pods of Broad Beans, but never seen, so far as I am 
aware, in any other variety of Pea." This pea is further 
described as of slender growth, without colored nodes, 
with flowers and pods singly or in pairs, with olive-green 
seeds, mottled with brown and no black hilum. From 
the dentate stipules ( dentate also along the inner margin ) 
and from the seeds, it seems as if this plant will prove 
referable to Pisum sativum abyssinicum, rather than 
to P. s;iti\imi syriacum P. humile Boiss. & Noe). 

2. Pisum sativum subsp. Jomardi Schrank i 
Alef., Landw. FL 43. 1866. as to name only. — P. 
Jomardi Schrank, in Bot. Zeit. Regenst. 4:309. 1805. 

Plant weak and low, reaching scarcely 45 cm, glaucous, stems 
angular, little branched; stipules dentate at the basal lobe; petioles 
terete, leaflets in one pair, ovate, emarginate or obtuse, mucronate, 
the uppermost faintly fimbriate; peduncles 4 angled, 1- rarely 
3-flowered; flowers white, wings faintly rose-colored. 

Egypt, collected by Mr. Jomard. According to 
him the native name is " Guilban " or " Djulban." 

We have net seen any specimen of this little pea; 
it is known only from Schrank's very poor description 
from which we give a free translation. Pod and seeds 
were not described by Schrank. 

There occurs in trade a form of the field pea 
under the name of Pisum Jomardi Hort., which was 
described by Alefeld {I.e.) as P. sativum .Jomardi. 
We grew plants from seeds received from Messrs. Haage 
& Schmidt under this name. They were quite different 
from Schrank's P. Jomardi. 

In his description of Pisum abyssinicum A. 
Braun i Flora 21:269. 1841) mentions a P. Jomardi 
and states the color of the flowers and of the seeds; 
from these notes it is evident that he had before him 
Alefeld's plant, a field pea, and not Schrank's type, with 
white flowers and only 1 pair of leaflets. 

Schrank says that the plant cannot be recommended 
for cultivation. It seems to come near to Pisum 
al>\ — inii ii m. 



1 Arthur W. Sutton, Results obtained by crossing a wild pea from Palestine with commercial types. 
PI 15-17. 1914. 



Jour. Linn. Soc. Bot. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF PEAS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



17 



3. Pisum sativum subsp. syriacum Berger nom. 
now— P. humile Boiss. & Noe, Diagn. II 2:45. 1856. 
Not P. humile Mill. Gard. Diet. ed. 8. No. 2. 1768. 

Annual herb. 30-40 cm high, branched from the base, slightly 
glaucous; stems flexuous, comparatively robust: stipules semi-ovate, 
semi-cordate at the base, with several deltoid, unequal teeth on 
the outer margin of the ± pointed basal lobe, shortly acuminate, 
mucronate, the largest about 4 cm long; petiole exceeding the 
stipules, with 1, 2, or 3 pairs of leaflets, ending in a 3- or 5-branched 
tendril: leaflets ovate or ovate-oblong, broader at the base, obtuse 
but rarely rounded, shortly mucronate, entire or the lower ones 
toothed, 20-25 cm long; peduncles 1-2 flowered, longer than the 
stipules: pedicels about as long as the calyx; flowers medium sized, 
16-20 mm long; calyx lobes slightly exceeding the tube; standard 
notched, pale lilac, wings purplish, longer than the keel; pods 
straight; seeds "globular, brown, marbled with green, finely 
granulate." 

Armenia, northern Syria, Mesopotamia, etc., on 
rocky soil. 

This comes nearer to Pisum sativum elatius and 
P. sativum arvense than to PJfulvum, but it is lower, 
has smaller flowers, the leaflets entire, and differently 
colored seeds. 

4. Pisum sativum subsp. elatius (Stev.) Alef. 
Landw. Fl. 44. 1866.— P. elatius Stev. in Marsch.- 
Bieb., FL Taur. 2:151. 1808. P. elatum Ser. in DC. 
Prodr. 2:368. 1825. P. variegatum Presl. FL Sic. 
1 :13. 1826. P. arvense variegatum Guss. Fl. Sic. 
Syn. 2:279. 1843. P. Tuffetii Less. FL Rochef. 170. 
1835. P. granulation Lloyd FL Loir. 75. 1844. 

Stems robust, 0.50-1.20 m high, more or less glaucous; stipules 
4-6 cm long, half-ovate, obtuse or pointed, basal lobes rounded 
and sometimes overlapping, on the outer margin sharply and 
irregularly toothed, teeth deltoid, unspotted ; petioles longer than 
the stipules, with 2 or usually 3 pairs of leaflets; leaflets ovate ellipti- 
cal, obtuse or truncate, mucronate, mostly with a few remote and 
shallow irregular teeth, 2-4.5 cm long; peduncles exceeding the 
petioles, sometimes as long as the leaf or longer, 1-3 flowered; 
flowers large, 3 cm long; standard broadly orbicular, deeply notched, 
pale lilac to violet -rose colored with somewhat darker veins; wings 
dark purple or blackish-purple; keel pinkish or greenish; pod linear, 
slightly curved or straight up to 10 cm long and 1.5 cm broad, 
blackish; seeds remote, almost globular, finely verruculose, brown 
or black, or marbled with darker spots. 

From the Mediterranean region to Asia Minor, 
the Caucasus, Syria, Persia, as far east as the Himalaya 
and Tibet (Prov. of Ladak), and northern Africa, 
generally in woods, on meadows, in hedges, etc., and 
usually not on fields. 

Rather variable. The following forms are men- 
tioned: 

a.) Forma biflorum Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 6 2 : 
1065. 1910.— P. biflorum Raf. Caratt. 71. 1810. P. 
elatius leiospermum Rouy & Fouc. Fl. France 5:282. 
1899. 

Seeds quite smooth, mostly greenish, marbled with 
brown and with fine black stripes. 

This form occurs in southern Tyrol and in Istria. A fur- 
ther particular white-flowered form of this is: forma albi flora 
Beck, which appeared in cultivation. 



b.) Forma Sanctae-Notburgae Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mittel- 
europ. Fl. 6 2 :1065. 1910.— P. biflorum var. Sanctae- 
Notburgae Pfaff & Murr. Alleg. Bot. Zeits. l.'5:24. 1907. 

Leaflets in 2-3 pairs, peduncles 1 -flowered; seeds some- 
what flattened by pressure, smooth, not striped. Has also been 
observed in Tyrol and Istria. 

Pisum sativum elatius is a robust plant, with wiry 
stems, and internodes often 10-12 cm long. The leaflets, 
though sometimes quite entire, almost always show a few 
dentate. The flowers are large and showy but variable in 
color. The peduncles usually, but not always, greatly exceed 
the stipules. 

5. Pisum sativum subsp. arvense Poir. Encycl. 
5:456. 1804.— P. arvense L., Sp. PL 727. 1753. 
P. sativum speciosum Alef. Landw. Fl. 41. 1866 
partly. 1 

Field Pea. Stems robust, 30-90 cm long or more; stipules 
large, oblong, often somewhat pointed, with the basal lobes variously 
rounded or acutish, overlapping or not, irregularly dentate on the 
outer side of the base, and with a purple blotch around the stem, 
up to about 5 cm long; petiole with 2-3 pairs of leaflets; leaflets ± 
elliptical or ovate-elliptical, usually broader near the base and nar- 
rowed towards the top, obtuse or somewhat pointed, mucronate 
often but not always remotely and shallowly dentate, up to about 
4.5 cm long; peduncles variable in length sometimes not exceeding 
the stipules, 1-2 (occasionally 3) flowered; flowers large, standard 
whitish, bluish, or purplish, with violet veins, greenish below; wings 
deep purple; keel greenish; pod up to 10 cm long or more; seeds 
angular, brown or dark spotted, smooth. 

Europe as far north as Scandinavia and through 
Russia, and probably through northern Asia; spon- 
taneously or as a weed on fields, often as an escape from 
cultivation. Cultivated in all this area and also in 
tropical Africa (specimens from Uganda, Lake Edward, 
in Herb. Kew.) 

Of the many varieties recorded the following seem 
to be the most important ones: 

5a.) var. quadratum Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 
6 2 :1066. 1910. — Pisum vulgare arvense ,J quadratum 
Miller; F. A. Schwarz FL NUrnb.-Erl. 2:207. 1899; 
? P. borussicum Hort., ex Steud. Nomencl. ed. 2. 2:345. 
1841; ? P. sativum borussicum Alef. Landw. Fl. 49. 1866; 
P P. bunctatum Hort. 
Plants tall and robust; stipules large, obtuse, serrate in the 

lower third; leaflets in 2(-3) pairs, remote, large, ovate, truncate or 

emarginate; seeds large, cubical or almost globular, yellowish brown, 

grey, greenish, yellowish, or densely marbled with darker blotches, 

often almost black when old. 

5b.) var. leptolobum Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 
6 2 :1066. 1910.— Pisum vulgare arvense » leptolobum 
F. A. Schwarz Fl. Nurnb.-Erl. 2:207. 1899.— P. lepto- 
lobum Camer. ex Rechb. Fl. Germ. Ex. 533. 1832; 
P. sativum capucinorum Alef. Landw. Fl. 42. 1866. 
" sugar pea." " Sichelerbse, Zuckererbse " (Germ.). 
Rather tall; leaflets in 2-3 pairs; pods falcate, tender and 

sweet without parchment-like lining; seeds brownish or greenish 

gray and spotted. 

Here belongs part of Sturtevant's Pisum macrocarpon 

(Rept. N. Y. Agr. Expt. Sta. Geneva N. Y. 3:238.) 1885, i.e. 

those with colored flowers and dark seeds. 

There exist dwarf forms with closely approximate leaflets. 



1 The following are probably forms of P. sativum arvense: P. sativum var. serratum Alef. Landw. Fl. 41. 1866. Weak, at 
most 2 feet high; lower leaves with 1 pair, upper ones with 2 pairs of leaflets, each leaflet with 6-7 sharp lateral teeth, the largest 
leaflets about 18 mm long and 8 mm wide; flowers and fruit not known. India; Ganges valley, leg. Schlagintweit. — P. sativum sube- 
foliatum Alef. I.e. 41, seems to be a strange small leaved form It was collected by Schlagintweit in Tibet near Leh, Prov. of Ladak.— 
Besides these and many others Alefeld (I.e. 42) describes a P. sativum smyrnense, said to be 6-7 feet tall, with deep purple flowers 
and dark blood red seeds with a black hilum. 



18 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



.ar liilxrnii um Asch. fls Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 

fi :i066. 1910.— Pisum rul&are arvente Mbernxcum 

A F. Schwarz FA NVirnb.-Erl. 2:207. 1899. P. sativum 
hiberntCUm Alef. Landw. Fl. 44. 1866. " Graue Winter - 
Futtererhse " Gen. 

Plants more slender than var. quadratum; stipules medium 
sired, sometimes serrate above the base; leaflets in two pairs, ovate 
to ovate-lanceolate; seeds rather small, red brown, unicolored or 
marbled, almost globular or slightly compressed. 

Cultivated in Bavaria, etc.; it is sown in the fall and harvested 
in the following year. 

Pisum remale Hort. grown by Haage & Schmidt, is similar, 
but the seeds are rather smaller. It is sown in spring: " Graue 
Fruhjarhrs-Futtercrbse " or " Peluschke." 

A subumbellate flowered form caused by the fasciation of the 
stems has been known for a long time and seems to come constant 
from seeds. It is known as: 

Sd. var. umbeuatum Berger. comb. nov. — P. sativum umbcllu- 
tum L. Sp. PI. 2 ed. 1027. 1763. "Mummy Pea" 
" Buschel-Trauben Erbse " Germ. 

Flowers subumbellate. 4-5 or more together; standard rose- 
colored, wings deep purple: seeds chestnut brown, large, round. 

There is a good figure of this or of Pisum sativum hor- 
tense co r o n a turn in Parkinson. Parad. 523. f. 4 1629 as 
" P:^um umbellatum sue roseum. Scottish or Tufted or Rose 
Pease." 

From India, Tibet, and China. A dwarf and slender stemmed 
pea with colored flowers, short pods, and brown seeds is found 
cultivated which may be a distinct race or variety. The red mark- 
ings on the stipules and stems are not now visible on herbarium 
specimens but it seems to belong to the field pea. 

The field pea can in most cases easily be recognized 
by its colored flowers, the red blotch around the stem 
at the insertion of the stipules and by the seeds. 
Herbarium specimens, when the red blotches become 
invisible and seeds are missing, cannot always be readily 
distinguished from those of either P. sativum elatius 
or P. Bativum hortense. 

We have had no opportunity to see specimens of 
Pisum ramularr Morrison ex Reich., Fl. Germ. Exc. 
532. 1832; it is described as having oblong almost 
entire stipules, purplish wings and keel, and yellowish 
green seeds with a black hilum. 

Flowers of a Pisum, evidently of P. sativum 
arvense are collected in Tibet as a drug 'at about 
14,000 feet near Yerba Monastery, Herb. Kew.l. 

6. Pisum sativum subsp. hortense Asch. & 
Graeb.. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 6':1066. 1910. — P. 
sativum L., Sp. PI. 727. 1753. P. sativum var. hor- 
tense Neilr., Fl. Nied.-Oester. 964. 1859. P. sativum 
var. txpicum Beck, Fl. Nied.-Oester. 887. 1893. 

Garden Pea. Stems robust, 25-90 cm or more, green or 
glaucous: stipules large and broad with the basal lobes usually 
rounded and overlapping, about 7 cm long, mostly obtuse, mucro- 
nate, irregularly crenate on the outer lower half; petioles stout, 
with 2 3 pairs of leaflets; leaflets ± ovate, ± obtuse, mucronate, 
entire, 3-5 cm long: peduncles of various length, as long as the 
petioles or exceeding them, 1-2 flowered: flowers large, petals white, 
greenish at the base: pod up to 10 cm long or more: seeds smooth, 
pale yellow or greenish, globular or more or less wrinkled or com- 
pressed and angular. 



Cultivated everywhere; no undisputably wild plants 
of it are known. It is cultivated in tropical Africa at 
Lake Edward in Uganda with the field pea (Herb. 
Kew. ). 

There are the following varieties: 

6a. var. pachylobum Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 
(r: 1067. 1910. — P. sativum typicum forma pachylobum 
Dierb. ex Beck in Reichb. IC. Fl. Germ. 22:209. 1903. 
P. sativum i L. Sp. PI. 727. 1753. " Kneifel " or " Pah- 
lerbse " Germ. . 
Valves of the pods hard and leathery. 

6b.) var. quadratum Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. 
Fl. 6M067. 1910.— P. sativum quadratum L.. Sp. PI. 
727. 1753. P. quadratum Reichb. Fl. Germ. Exc. 533. 
1832. " Pois carre " French ; " Mark; Ecker; Knacker; 
and Lupinenerbse " Germ. |. 

Plants mostly very glaucous, upper calyx lobes often 
more obtuse; seeds closely set, sides compressed and angular. 

6c.) var. humile Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 
6 s : 1067. 1910.— P. humile Mill., Gard. Diet. ed. 8. no. 2. 
1768. P. sativum var. humile Poir. Encyl. 5 : 456. 1804. 
"Pois nains " French . 

Plants small and low, branched. Leaflets roundish. 
This comprises the low garden varieties and is not the 
same as Boissier's plant of this name, which becomes Pisum 
satiwini Byriacum. 

6d. var. saccharatum Asch. & Graebn. Syn. Mitteleurop. Fl. 
6 s : 1067. 1910. — P. sativum •: saccharatum Ser. in DC. 
Prodr. 2:368. 1825. P. sativum i macrocarpum Ser. 
I.e. P. sullosum Risso, fide Alef. Landw. Fl. 38. 1866. 
P. sativum , L. Sp. PI. 727. 1753. "Sugar pea," "pois 
sucres, pois mange-tout " French); " Zuckererbse " (Germ. I. 
Fruits large with tender, fleshy, edible, and not parch- 
ment-like valves; seeds loosely set, globular; peduncles 
mostly 2 -flowered. 

6e.) var. ioron.it um Berger nov. comb. — P. sativum coro- 
narum Alef. Landw. Fl. 52. 1866. P. sativum var. 
UmbellatVm Hort., ex Sutton, Journ. Linn. Soc. 42:430. 
PI. 15, f. 2, and PI. 17. f. 10. 1914. Not L. "Crown- 
flowered " or so-called " Mummy Pea." A. W. Sutton, I.e.) 
Stems tall, about 6 feet, fasciated, with almost umbel- 
late white erect flowers at the top; seeds whitish, globular or 
slightly wrinkled. 

This corresponds to var. umbeUatum of the field pea, 
and similar forms are apt to be found among the other species 
and subspecies. 

6f. var. ecirrhosum Berger var. nov. 

Plants 20-30 cm high; lower leaves 2-foliolate with the 
usual short rudimentary tendril, all the others without 
tendril but with a terminal odd leaflet, upper leaves with as 
many as nine leaflets: leaflets opposite, ovate-obtuse, mucro- 
nate, entire or rarely toothed, rather small, decreasing in 
size, the lower ones about 20 mm, the upper ones about 
8 mm long; stipules diverging, somewhat pointed, basal 
lobes rather short, dentate; lowest flowers from the fourth 
leaf, peduncles finally about twice as long as the stipules, 
1 -flowered; flowers white. 

This plant is the variety " Acacia; " we do not know 
its origin. It is a very remarkable pea showing the usual 
reversion — the rudimentary tendril — on the lower leaves; 
and entire lack of tendrils on the upper leaves — another 
reversion to a much older type. The variety merits a botani- 
cal name for about the same reason as Duchesne's Kracuria 
vesca var. monophylla which also originated in cultivation. 




Much whitened, deeply clasping stipules 



HARRISON GLORY 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



CANADA FIELD 



SMILEY 



BLUE PRUSSIAN 




WM HURST 



GOLIATH 



MARYLAND PRIDE 



ARISTOCRAT 



SUTTON BEST OF ALL 



TYPES OF PEA PODS 



'Natural size) 



CHAPTER III 

DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 

GENERAL NOTES 



In preparation for the descriptions which follow, 
more than 500 varieties or strains of peas were grown at 
the Station for two or more seasons between 1922 and 
192 7. Seeds of these peas were secured from the origi- 
nators of the varieties wherever possible; otherwise 
from seedsmen believed to be reliable; but in many cases 
the choice of source was decidedly limited, the variety 
being listed in only one or two current catalogs, often 
not those of the originators. Thus, tho care was taken 
to secure seed true to name, some errors were revealed 
and corrected where a known or unknown variety was 
received for the one desired: and probably other substitu- 
tions of this nature have escaped notice. To lessen the 
danger of such errors, one or more of the authors have 
visited and studied extensive collections of pea varieties 
at other places, notably those of the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture at McMillan, Mich., and Washington, D. C; 
and of the J. B. Rice Seed Co., at Cambridge, N. Y., 
and have exchanged seeds of many varieties with those 
in charge of these trial grounds, and those of the N. B. 
Keeney & Son Co., Leroy, N. Y., the D. M. Ferry Co., 
Detroit, Mich., the J. H. Allan Seed Co., Sheboygan, 
Mich., the Rogers Bros. Seed Co., Alpena, Mich., the 
Clark Seed Co., Milford, Conn., the Idaho, Minnesota 
and Wisconsin Stations, and the University of British 
Columbia. Many visits with pea experts connected 
with some of the above institutions and letters from these 
and other authorities in pea growing have aided very 
materially in checking up our data and giving most 
valuable information relative to pea varieties and their 
history. The sincere thanks of the authors and of the 
Station are due and are given to these men and firms, 
and others whose names are so many that our limited 
space forbids individual mention. In spite of all such 
precautions, however, undoubtedly critical study of the 
material here presented will show many errors of which 
the authors will be most grateful to know. 

For information regarding old varieties and others of 
which seed was not available, and for historical data, 
books, periodicals and catalogs in great number have 
been consulted. For errors in compilation of such 
material the authors are responsible, but for the infor- 
mation itself the works consulted must be given credit. 

For recording characteristics of the varieties grown, 
check sheets were used, made up in advance of the first 
season's sowing of peas, on which sheets a place was 
provided for all characteristics of pea plants, — seeds, 
stems, foliage, flowers, pods, and peas, — that seemed of 
horticultural, classificatory, or genetical importance, 
each characteristic being so subdivided that a simple 
check mark made the record. Different colored pencils 
were used in different seasons, so that changes in char- 



acteristics or their degree during the two or more years 
of growth of the variety could be shown on one card. 
In most cases notes were taken on the varieties for three 
seasons. 

In making these sheets, and especially in preparing 
the data for publication, technical terms were avoided 
as far as possible, and emphasis placed on those of horti- 
cultural importance; — for the practical grower rather 
than for scientists. It is believed that most of the terms 
used need no explanation, but it is thought well to define, 
briefly, a few of them: 

Height — Length of main stem extended not quite to breaking 
point; not distance from ground to top of plant grown on vertical 
support. 

Node — Enlargement of stem from which originate stipules 
and leaf and flower stalks; joint. 

Internode — Smooth portion of stem between nodes or joints. 

Shape and size — Of stipules and leaflets, average of specimens 
taken near center of stem; ot pods, average of at least twenty speci- 
mens collected as representative. 

Stipules — Leaflike structures, always paired and larger than 
leaflets, on nodes at base of leaf-stalks. 

Clasping I deeply, lightly) — Degree to which ear-like bases 
of stipules surround stem. 

Glaucous — With bloom, a powdery natural covering of 
stipules, leaflets, pods or stems, easily removable by rubbing. 

Peduncle — Main portion of flower- or pod-stalk. 

Pedicel — Short joint of flower- or pod-stalk, connecting 
peduncle and flower or pod. 

Receptacle — Hard enlargement of upper end of pedicel from 
which neck of pod starts, surrounded by calyx. 

Calyx — Collection of five sepals. 

Sepals — Small leaf-like persistent floral parts which are 
attached to receptacle and surround neck of pod. 

Dorsum — Back of pod, with dorsal suture on opposite inner 
sides of which peas are alternately attached. 

Ventrum — Front of pod, with ventral suture, which splits 
to allow peas to escape. 

Curved — Pod more or less bowed or arched backward — 
" hollow-backed " — usually spoken of as recurved; but number of 
peas with pods curved forward is small, so thought best to use simple 
term " curved " for varieties generally, with specific mention of 
exceptions. 

End — Of pod, part remote from neck; used with terms 
pointed, long-rounded, rounded, short-rounded, blunt, square or 
protuberant to indicate extent of sharpness or bluntness. 

Tip — Distinctly marked extended end of dorsum of pod. 

Point — Small, threadlike extension of tip found in a few 
varieties. 

Owing to the great number of varieties to be 
described, it was soon realized that to mention all char- 
acteristics for each one, as was done with the major 
varieties of fruits in the " Fruits of New York," would 
exceed our allowable limit of space. Accordingly, in 
discussing the pea varieties, these have been placed in 
groups in most of which one or more typical varieties 
are described in detail and the others of the group 
related to the type by comparison, using resemblances 



19 



20 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



or differences in characteristics rather than detailed 
statements of them. 

These groups, with some subdivisions, are: 



Extra Early 
Tom Thumb 
Marrowfat 

Seeds White 

Seeds Black-eyed 
Alaska 
Scimitar 

White-seeded 

Green-seeded 

Sabre type 
Dunpled-Seeded 

White or Cream Seeds 

Green Seeds 
Wrinkled. Cream-seeded 

Very Dwarf 

Dwarf 

Of Medium Height 

Tall 



Large-podded Dwarf 

Pointed-pod 

Blunt -pod 

Daisy type 
Advancer 
Stratagem 

Champion of England 
Nc Plus Ultra 
Telephone 
Senator 
Edible-podded 

White-seeded 

Butter Sugars 

Dark-seeded 
Field peas 

Minor varieties in above groups 
from Extra Early to Senator 
Undescribed varieties 



In listing pea varieties we have used, as far as 
possible, the principles applied in " Standardized Plant 
Names," but since peas were not listed in that work 
we had no satisfactory guide in many nomenclatural 
puzzles. In such cases we have usually chosen the 
simplest, or best known, of the names applied to a 
variety. In many cases, especially in Edible-podded 
peas, it was necessary to use complex names, usually 
combinations of nouns, adjectives and adverbs, since 
very similar combinations applied to distinct varieties. 
In case of duplicated names of varieties liable to be 
confused, we have generally prefixed the introducer's 
name; as Sutton Hundredfold, Carter Hundredfold. 
In such cases we have dropped the possessive sign; but 
have retained this in names like Gardeners' Favorite. 

The numbers following the name of each variety 
refer to similar numbers arranged consecutively, and as 
far as possible, chronologically, for each variety and 
for the group, which indicate citations to literature and 
to catalogs giving historical, genetical and other informa- 
tion relative to the variety, and the synonyms found 
for it. These group references and synonyms are 
collected at the end of the descriptive material, rather 
than separately at the close of each group; which is 
thought will make easier prompt location of the refer- 
ence, especially since major and minor varieties of the 
groups are separated. 

Additional references, without numbers, occur very 
often in connection with the individual varieties. These 
usually give information relative to the history of the 
variety in the United States; but occasionally refer to 
notes coming to the authors' attention after the main 
lists had been compiled, when interpolation of the 
reference in its proper place would have involved many 
changes and would have been very liable to lead to errors. 

To economize space, names and synonyms are not 
repeated, tho used for more than one variety, but the 
number and place in the first reference to each are given 
in subsequent citations. 

In following these descriptions of varieties the reader 
must remember that they are based, wherever possible, 



on the characteristics and behavior of the plants on our 
test plats; and that these differ, in many cases quite 
noticeably, from those of the same varieties grown 
elsewhere, even in the United States but particularly 
in England and British Columbia, from which sources 
seed of many varieties was secured. Tho on fairly good 
pea soils, giving excellent yields in favorable seasons, our 
pea-test plats are not high in fertility nor is this quickly 
available; so that in seasons without abundant spring 
moisture, particularly if temperatures were high, pea 
plants were shorter than those grown elsewhere, the 
pods smaller and less well filled, and the time to edible 
maturity less. With the taller varieties the height 
might be two feet, or even more, less than for the same 
variety grown in England or British Columbia, or one 
to two feet less than for the same varieties grown in 
northern Michigan. With varieties of medium and 
dwarf height the differences were less noticeable, but 
almost without exception in the same direction. 

Differences in pod lengths corresponded in general 
with lengths of the pods as given in original descriptions, 
the discrepancy being greatest in those English varieties 
like Quite Content, V. C and Giant Stride, which in 
England showed numerous exhibition pods nine or ten 
inches in length, but which with us rarely exceeded five 
inches. Pods of varieties of the Telephone or Ne Plus 
Ultra groups, reaching five or six inches in England, would 
average an inch or so shorter with us ; while pods of the 
Large-podded Dwarf, Wrinkled, Cream-seeded and Gem 
groups compared fairly well in length with those grown 
elsewhere. 

As would be expected, the shortening of the pods on 
our plats was accompanied by a lessening of the number 
of peas, usually due to failure of ovules near the end of 
the pod to develop; and this caused a change in the degree 
of plumpness of the end of the pod, " long-rounded " or 
" rounded " pods becoming " pointed; " " blunt ended " 
pods, " short rounded " or " rounded; " etc., altho these 
variations were not usually great enough or extending 
completely enough thru the variety to obscure the 
classification as " pointed " or " blunt -ended " which 
was used as a separatory group characteristic. 

As these deficiencies of peas on our soils were soon 
recognized, much care was taken to secure checks on 
them, by visits to other trial grounds and by correspond- 
ence; and attention is called to such differences in the 
descriptions of many varieties; but the reader must not 
forget that with many varieties no such checking was 
possible, and that in such cases the same factors were 
operative on our plats to lessen the height of plants and 
to alter the length and appearance of the pods as were 
noted with the checked varieties. The descriptions 
of any such varieties, therefore, probably picture the 
pea as it would grow in normal or slightly sub-normal 
conditions, rather than as it would be at its best. 

One very noticeable effect of our soil upon certain 
seed characteristics was observed in one season, that of 
1922. Before sowing the peas that year, samples of the 
seed of all varieties were taken and placed in glass vials, 
closely sealed and held in darkness to retard change in 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



21 



color. Samples of the crop seeds were also taken late 
in the season, when practically all varieties were fully 
ripened, and were similarly preserved for laboratory 
study and comparison. When these comparisons were 
made it was found that with practically all varieties 
except those in the Extra Early, Marrowfat and Alaska 
groups, a noticeable change had occurred during the 
season, so that crop seeds were markedly larger than the 
seeds sown, with much more green pigment in both 
seed-coat and cotyledons, and with a decided increase in 
wrinkling of the seed coat. So great were these changes, 
particularly in many varieties of dimpled peas, that 
varieties wholly cream-seeded as sown became equally 
cream-seeded and green-seeded at harvest, while those 
with part green, part cream seeds at sowing became 
wholly green -seeded in the crop; and with both color 
combinations, the seed-coats were practically those of 
wrinkled peas. Similar, tho less marked, differences 
were found in the wrinkled peas. We ascribe these dif- 
ferences, either to the soil or to a distinctly moist grow- 
ing season; but have not been able to decide between 
these factors. The changes could not have been due 
to premature harvesting as some have suggested; as all 
varieties were fully ripe at time of collection of pods, 
many of them so far along that it was difficult to find 
pods with unshed peas. 

Peas on our plats ripened quite promptly; but we 
were unable to secure any such precocity as has marked 
the advertising of many varieties. Marked shortening 
of the time to edible maturity could be secured by late 
sowing, throwing the growth period into days and weeks 
of high heat units, a diminution of a week to ten days or 
even a fortnight in the length of time to edibility being 
readily secured by sowing in late May or early June, 
rather than in mid-April. In an early test to ascertain 
the influence of date of sowing on time to maturing, 
short rows of smooth and wrinkled varieties were sown a 
week apart from early April to early June, a difference 
of ten weeks in time of sowing ; yet pods on the rows last 
sown were ready for picking less than twenty days after 
those on the rows first sown. A later, more extensive 
test' in connection with canning crop investigations was 
made in 1927, to show effect of successive plantings on 
time of maturity and yield. In this test, Alaska, Sur- 
prise, Green Admiral and Horsford Market Garden 
peas were sown in 200-seed lots at approximately weekly 
intervals from April 9 to May 28, eight weeks. The 
time required to canning stage was successively reduced: 
For Alaska, from 63 days from first sowing to 37 days for 
those last sown; for Surprise, from 63 days to 38 days; 
for Green Admiral, from 71 days to 46 days; and for 
Horsford, from 75 days to 47 days. The yields were also 
successively decreased with the shortened times to 
maturity: For Alaska, from 30 ounces of shelled peas 
from the 200 seeds first sown to 10 ounces from those 
last sown; for Surprise, from 31 ounces to 11 ounces; 
for Green Admiral, from 40 ounces to nothing (3 ounces 
for next to last sowing ) ; for Horsford, from 58 ounces to 



4 ounces. In no case was there an exception to the 
rule, " The later the sowing the shorter is the time to 
maturity;" and with but one exception, the yields 
decreased successively with advancing dates of sowing. 
With Green Admiral those sown April 30 yielded slightly 
more than those sown April 25. 

The shortest time from sowing to edible peas of 
which we have any record is one from Florida, 30 days; 
which again connects days of high heat units with 
quickened growth; and the longest time in America, 
from northern Michigan, where 112 days was needed 
from seeding to edibility of an " early " pea. This 
influence of early and late seeding and similar changes 
induced by hot, dry seasons probably account for the 
great discrepancies in recorded accounts of earliness in 
varieties; such as the Gardeners Chronicle statements 
in succeeding years that " Superior First Early was 10 
to 14 days ahead of Early Frame " and " much later 
than Early Frame." 

One fact revealed by our tests of peas, and the same 
applies to other vegetables subsequently grown, is the 
surprising uniformity in time of reaching edibility of 
many varieties of similar type. Catalog notices of the 
different varieties in the Extra Early Group, for example, 
in which certain ones are commended as " extremely 
early," " earliest pea known," or " a full week ahead 
of any other," with data for different growth periods, 
led us to expect the time of maturing to be a helpful 
separatory factor; but, to our surprise, scores of varieties 
on our soils and under our climatic conditions, sown 
on the same date, were ready to pick at the same time 
or were separated by such slight intervals that, as one 
student of peas of wide experience said, " You need a 
stop watch to tell which is ready first." It is evident 
that growers must test unknown varieties with known 
ones, on their own fields, in the same seasons, to get 
reliable knowledge of relative earliness. 

Our possession of records of early pea tests at this 
Station, in 1882-1884 and in 1893, enabled us to compare 
data for many varieties which were also grown, in the 
same locality, in our recent tests. The later notes showed, 
almost invariably that pea varieties, unless very carefully 
watched, rogued, and successively " improved," tend to 
degenerate with age and produce longer vines, more 
scanty and narrower-leaved foliage, shorter and more 
slender pods and smaller peas. For example, Early Kent 
in 1884 was 2 to 3 feet tall, somewhat branched at base, 
and with quite large seeds ; while recently it was 3 } •? to 
3 3 4 feet tall, unbranched, and with smaller seeds. It 
was very evidently returning to the parent type, Early 
Frame. 

Such changes in pea varieties as have been indicated 
above, with the influence of other factors that is shown 
more clearly in the discussion of individual varieties, 
must be given due weight in interpreting descriptions of 
peas, which are possibly more subject than almost any 
other vegetable to variations induced by age, soil and 
season. 



1 N. Y. State Sta. Bui. 553:10. 1928. 



22 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



EXTRA EARLY GROUP 



The name Extra Early must be considered, not as 
the name of a particular variety, though it has been, 
and still is, so used; but rather of a group of varieties 
of similar type. Many of these have the words as part 
of the name; while others bear more distinctive designa- 
tions, but are equally " Extra Earlies." 

Group characteristics. — In general the Extra 
Early group is characterized by very early season, 
slender vines, varying in length from below l'j feet 
to above 2 ' ■_• feet, according to conditions and the rigor 
of selection for dwarfness, with internodes medium in 
length or above, unbranched or with a few, small, basal 
branches: medium to light green, rather scanty to 
fairly abundant foliage, consisting of four leaflets of 
medium size and regular shape, and two much larger 
stipules with rounded tips and teeth usually about one- 
third of the way from base to tip, of the same basal 
color as the leaflets but more whitened; with flowers 
beginning at 8th to 9th node, or 10th to 11th on taller 
vines, generally single but occasionally paired; with 
pods from 2 ' ( to 2 ' ■_> inches or somewhat longer or 
shorter in a few varieties, plump, straight or slightly 
curved, having blunt ends and small tips, generally 
well filled; peas 5 or 6 in number, round, smooth, more 
or less oval longitudinally, light green or whitish green 
in color, usually of poor color when cooked unless used 
early as " petit pois," soon becoming hard, starchy and 
rather tasteless; seeds round, smooth or very slightly 
pitted, cream or slightly salmon tinted in color, often 
almost white especially over certain parts of the pea, or 
rarely with some seeds light green, with cotyledons 
yellow or light orange and radicle obscure; weighing 
from 125 to 150 or more to the ounce. 

History. — This group, undoubtedly most com- 
plicated of any in names and synonyms, has varied 
little, except in minor ways: and it is probable that the 
earliest types showed individual plants hardly distin- 
guishable in some group characteristics, such as habit, 
precocity, shape and arrangement of pods, number of 
peas in pod, quality of peas and size and shape of seeds, 
from plants in varieties or types now grown. 

The type unquestionably shows marked improve- 
ment ; but the advance has consisted in grouping in a new 
variety or strain more of the desirable characteristics; 
and, especially, in securing uniformity and permanence 
of these characters. This has probably been done, in 
practically all cases, by selection, possibly with some 
accidental crossing; for no introduction of new blood 
is definitely recorded. The new varieties, unless con- 
scientiously rogued or selected, rapidly degenerated, 
returning, in hands of different growers, partially or 
almost completely to the parent variety. Some one 
again " improved " the stock and gave it a new name. 
The introducer, or other growers of the pea, sustained 
his claims of superiority by comparison, intentional 
or incidental, with some of the deteriorating strains 
the earlier variety; while other growers, who were 



fortunate enough to have carefully selected strains of the 
parent variety to compare with its offspring, pronounced 
the latter no improvement; and relegated the new name 
to the list of synonyms. This process, repeated thru 
three centuries in England, France, Germany and 
Holland, and later very extensively in America, has 
given us multitudes of synonyms, often repeatedly 
interlocked, and of present names, for varieties practi- 
cally identical for all horticultural purposes, but with 
slight differences which justify at least part of the 
current names. 

Descriptions of early varieties of peas are usually 
very meagre; but the progenitor of the Extra Early 
peas was undoubtedly included, in 1629, in Parkinson's 
Reference 1) "French pease" at some time brought 
from France, " or Fulham pease " from the locality 
near London where they succeeded best. These were 
very early, hardy, smooth, white peas, with " climbing " 
vines. Enough of the characters of the Rouncivals, 
Hastings, Rose, Spotted, Gray, and " Peas without 
skins " are mentioned by Parkinson, to exclude these 
as sources from which Extra Early came. The Hot- 
spurs followed the early type, but just when they origi- 
nated, or what, if any, named varieties preceded them in 
their development from the " French pease " is unknown. 
The Messrs. Lawson say that Hotspur dates back to 
1670; and the name in some of its modifications con- 
tinued for at least a century. Some of the Hotspurs 
or " Hots " headed the list of earliest peas during most 
of the century, but about 1750 the variety, or the name, 
" Early Charlton," from " Charlton Hotspur," became 
common, and remained popular until displaced by Early 
Frame about 1770. For another hundred years Early 
Frame held a place in many catalogs, and is even listed 
by Vilmorin in 1926 under one of its synonyms, Michaux 
ordinaire; but early in the nineteenth century " im- 
proved " forms began to displace it, or to be grown 
simultaneously with it. In England, however, with 
the advent of Knight's Marrows and other high quality 
peas, interest in the starchy types diminished, so that 
no really distinct strains of Extra Early appeared for 
about 70 years; but American growers, working on 
stocks which came from England or from France, 
announced several varieties during the first half of the 
19th century. In 1823 Landreth introduced his Extra 
Early, the first strain to bear the group name, and this 
is still extensively cataloged, as, when well selected, it 
holds its own well with the hundred other strains of the 
group. This was followed about 1827 by Early Wash- 
ington, Early Dwarf, Early June and others; while in 
England, and later coming to America, some leading 
kinds have been Early Warwick or Racehorse, Early 
Emperor, Prince Albert, and Early Kent. 

Practically all of the early names and strains, 
except Landreth's, have now disappeared, tho some 
of them still appear in the lists of a few old-time 
seedsmen. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



23 



After 1850 strains, or names, appeared rapidly, 
one or more every year or two, in this country, in 
England, or on the Continent, most of the foreign 
varieties being soon brought to America. Leading 
varieties in the succession were: Sangster No. 1, 
Daniel O'Rourke, Dillistone Early, First Crop and 
Ringleader i identical ), Dickson First and Best, Caracta- 
cus, Philadelphia Extra Early, Hartford (or East 
Hartford' Extra Early, Dexter (or Early Dexter), 
Ferry First and Best, Henderson First of All, Rural 
New Yorker, Breck Excelsior, Maud S, Burpee Extra 
Early, Lightning, Pedigree Extra Early, First in Market, 
and Summit. Many of these were found on sale in the 
United States in 1889, according to Bailey's Annals of 
Horticulture of that year; as were several others, of 
which it has been impossible to obtain exact dates of 
origin: Bergen Fleetwing, Premier Extra Early, Eureka 
Extra Early, Extra Early Challenge, Extra Early Market, 
Extra Earlies with names of seedsmen prefixed, as well 
as the name Extra Early alone in many other seedsmen's 
catalogs. First and Best and Iowa Challenge. 

In the next ten or twelve years, preceding the 
publication of Tracy's list, several more varieties were 
introduced, the most prominent being Electric (second), 
John L, Sunol, Extra Early Pioneer, Lightning Express, 
McLean First and Best, and Rice Extra Early. Bulletin 
No. 21 of the Division of Plant Industry, U. S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, listed the varieties of vegetables 
offered in all obtainable American seedsmen's catalogs 
of 1901 or 1902. In this Tracy records Extra Early 
alone as listed in 68 catalogs; Extra Early with the 
seedsmen's names prefixed, in 27 cases; and 37 other 
varieties previously mentioned in the history of the 
group. Since that time several others have appeared: 
First Early, Special Extra Early, Keeney Extra Early, 
Wonderful Extra Early, Giant Lightning, Saxonia or 
Ohio Chief, Blue Ribbon Chieftain, Record Breaker, 
and Eversure. 

MAJOR VARIETIES IN EXTRA EARLY GROUP 

Hotspur.— Refs. 2-8; Booth Car. 1810; Russell 
Cat. 1827; Landreth Cars. 1828 and 1832. The 
history of Hotspur is well indicated in that of the Extra 
Early group; to which may be added its early appearance 
in America as recorded by Randolph under its synonym, 
Ormond [Omerod's?], and by Booth, Russell and Lan- 
dreth. Descriptions of it are scanty, beginning with that 
of the Fuller, Stacy, Blackwell catalog, " — the speed- 
iest of growth of any, that being sown about the middle 
of May will in six weeks time return ripe again 
into your hands." In 1778 is was noted as of moderate 
growth, 3 or 4 feet with dwarf forms only half as much, 
and excellent bearing. Landreth, in 1832, says Hotspur 
closely resembles Charlton; the Messrs. Lawson in 
1836 describe the pods as generally in pairs, three inches 
long and one-half inch broad, nearly straight and well 
filled with peas similar to but larger than those of Double- 
blossomed Frame. Name and strain are no longer used. 

Charlton. Refs. 7 (in part), 9-11; and Booth 
Cat. 1810; Gard. Mag. (Loudon): No. 77. 1836. 



(rptd. from Trans. Hort. Soc. 2nd ser. 1:396); Sin- 
clair Car. 1839; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 528. 1863 (citing 
Lawson, 1836); Gard. Chron. 198. 1850 and 292. 
1865. Charlton is inextricably mixed with Hotspur 
in the history of the group. It was listed by American 
seedsmen in 1810 and in 1839; and Burr described it at 
some length, his description and another made in Eng- 
land in 1836 being very similar. Burr says: 

Plant about 5 feet high, of vigorous growth; leaves large with 
short petioles; tendrils small; pods broad containing 6 or 7 peas 
of excellent ['.'] quality, rather larger than those of Early Frame 
" with which this is often confounded. It may, however, be dis- 
tinguished by its stronger habit of growth, flat pods, larger seeds, 
and by being fit for use about a fortnight later than the Early 
Frame." 

It is elsewhere said to be very prolific, the best pea 
for standing winter |in England], continues much longer 
in bearing than Early Frame and varies greatly under 
different conditions. Burr indicates clearly the con- 
nection of Hill's, Hovey's and Landreth's Extra Earlies 
and Daniel O'Rourke with Charlton, Hotspur and 
Early Frame. The Gardener's Chronicle maintains 
distinctions between Charlton and Early Frame, giving 
differences as above; but says, later, practically identical 
with Prince Albert. 

Early Frame. Refs. 12-25; Booth Cat. 1810; 
Landreth Car. 1832; Gard. Mag. (Loudon): No. 27. 
1836. (rptd. from Trans. Hort. Soc. 2nd ser. 1:396); 
Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 534. 1863; Vilmorin-Andrieux 
Les PI. Pot. 429. 1883. In England Early Frame sup- 
planted Charlton about 1770; but, as with Hotspur 
and Charlton, the next references we find to it are in 
America, where it was listed by Booth, Sinclair and 
Landreth, before the long list of its synonyms was 
printed in the Horticultural Register. Rogers says 
this pea was first noticed accidentally by a mechanic, 
in a field of Early Charlton peas, near Wingham, in 
Kent. He spoke of the pea to Mr. Russell, proprietor 
of the Lewisham Nursery, who developed a stock for 
his customers. The early Double -blossomed Frame 
was a chance seedling of the single-blossomed form. 
" With both sorts hundreds of acres have been annually 
sown in the neighborhood of Dartford, in Kent, for 
the supply of the London Markets, during the season 
for which wagon loads in sacks are continually going 
night and day." 

In the Horticultural Register reference Early 
Frame was dismissed very shortly, as " too well known 
for detailed description; " but it was said to be four or 
five feet tall, only moderate in yield, and one of the 
earliest, with white seeds of medium size. 

" The great number of synonyms is probably 
explained by seedsmen giving their own particular title 
or name to such a good early pea " — a practice not 
altogether unknown in America ! Another fragment of 
description adds: 

Vines slender; pods small, round; peas mostly 4 to 5; very 
prolific; of excellent quality; and calls it the earliest pea. 

Burr's description of the pea in America adds 
some particulars: 



24 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Pods in pairs, slightly bent backward, well rilled, rather abrupt 
at both ends. 2 ' _• inches long by » to ' j inch broad; seeds round and 
plump, cream colored but whitish toward the eye and at the union 
of the cotyledons. Sown May 1 pods were ready for use in 67 days, 
which differs but little from the two crops of it grown at the Station, 
63 days, making it now. at least, a second early. 

Denaiffe described Early Frame (Michaux ordi- 
naire' about 1906: 

Second early. 3'j feet tall, pods straight or slightly curved, 
slender, square at the end, 2 3 „ to 2 3 a inches long, borne from the 
10th node up. well filled, containing 7-8 seeds, yielding finely. 

Vilmorin-Andrieux, twenty years earlier, say it 
might be described as a sub-variety of Early Emperor. 

Stems branching just below the flowers, the branches also 
fruiting: pods always paired, beginning at the 10th node, and 
forming 12 tiers, or circles, straight, rather narrow and small, very 
well filled: seeds very round, white shaded salmon, medium in size. 

As Early Frame is still cultivated on the Continent. 
seeds were obtained from France and grown at the Sta- 
tion, for two years, and our detailed description of it 
differs but little in essential points from much older ones. 

Growth, from the same lot of seed, to 4 1 •_> or 5 feet 
in a favorable season or 3 feet in a hotter, drier one, with 
change of flowering node from 12 13 to 10-11, indicates 
the variability of characters even in an old, well-fixed 
variety, and shows the impossibility of speaking in 
mathematically exact terms of any variety. Similar 
variations occur in other characters, particularly of pods 
and peas, which are the principal bases of selection. 

Added characters of Early Frame noted by us are: Dark to 
medium green foliage, as a whole not much whitened, — 4 leaflets; 
stipules somewhat whitened, only slightly larger than the leaflets, 
lightly clasping, with sharp tips and margins toothed about one- 
half way from base, moderately prominent tendrils, slender and 
much curled; flowers white, usually single but often paired, on 
medium to long, slender peduncles which form medium to short, 
slender pod stalks " shanks " : pods almost identical with those 
described by Denaiffe, lighter in color than the foliage, blunt to 
square at end with small straight tips: peas of medium size, round, 
smooth, light green to yellowish green, of fair to good quality for a 
starchy pea: seeds smooth or sometimes finely pitted, round, very 
small 165 to an ounce , cream colored or sometimes very light 
green; radicle very prominent, cotyledons yellow; yield good to 
very good. 

The variety is too late, too tall and has too slender 
pods to compare favorably with the best current types 
of Extra Early. It has, however, remained surprisingly 
good much longer, a century and a half, than do most 
strains. 

I.amln ih Extra Early. Refs. 26, 27; Country 
Gent. 9:111. 1857: Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 529. 1863; 
Rural N. Y. 11 : 562. 1882. In a letter to the Country 
Gentleman in 1859 David Landreth says he intro- 
duced this variety " thirty-six years ago," thus dating 
its origin before 1823; and it is listed in his catalog 
of 1824, selling at double the price of other varieties. 
Nowhere, so far as we can find, are its parentage and 
manner of origin stated, but Burr names it, with Hill's 
and Hovey's Extra Earlies, as an improved American 
variety of Charlton. All descriptions found are in quite 
general terms. In 1836, sown June 2, before hot, dry 
weather, a few pods ready to use were secured in 35 
days. Other references emphasize its earliness. 



As the first American Extra Early now in cultiva- 
tion, it seems advisable to give a full description of it 
as grown here for three years. Sown late in April or 
on May 1, pods were ready for use in 56 or 57 days, or 
in 51 days when sown May 22, and pickings continued 
for almost two weeks, tho shortened when sown late. 

Description. — Plants 2'j to 2'{> feet high, drooping, so that 
support is optional, vigorous; stem medium to slender, round, 
smooth, slightly ridged longitudinally; internodes of medium length 
and nodes not very prominent; branches usually lacking; foliage 
abundant to dense, medium green often slightly yellowed, both 
leaflets and stipules without perceptible bloom; leaflets four, medium 
in size and shape; stipules considerably larger than leaflets, lightly 
clasping, of same basal color as leaflets, but considerably whitened, 
with sharp tip and lower margin cut into a few low teeth; tendrils 
not striking: flowers begin at 11th node, creamy white, more single 
than in pairs, on medium to long peduncles, of medium diameter; 
pods 2'j to 2 l ■>• occasionally 2 :t .i inches, medium in breadth, and 
above medium in plumpness, smooth, round to oval in section, 
straight, regular, often not perfectly filled to tip, usually filled to 
edge, with blunt to square ends and medium sized straight tip, 
lighter in color than the foliage, holding condition rather poorly: 
peas five to six in a pod, not always uniform in size and shape, of 
medium size, smooth, round, whitish green in color, of fair quality; 
seeds smooth, seldom pitted or wrinkled, round, small to medium 
in size (about 135 to an ounce i, cream colored; radicle obscure; 
cotyledons orange; yield only good, the pods being rather small, 
and not too well filled. 

The variety, considering its age and all condi- 
tions, holds a prominent place among the Extra Earlies, 
and it is undoubtedly the source from which a goodly 
proportion of our other strains have originated. 

Early Washington. Refs. 24, 28, 32, 34; Mag. 
Hort. 7:137. 1841; 10:91, 93. 1844; Hovey Cat. 1859; 
U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. iAgr.): 18. 1860. From the name, 
its early listing in America and several notices of it here 
long before it was tested in England in 1866 or 1867, 
Early Washington is probably American. 

In 1844 it was considered identical with Early 
Frame; but as it was not compared with it when growing, 
to establish the synonymy, the name was continued. 
At Chiswick i Ref. 34 ) the name was considered a syno- 
nym of Early Emperor. 

It was for a long time very popular as an extremely 
early, very prolific, smooth pea; and is still listed in 
some American catalogs. 

As grown at the Station for three years it was about a half 
foot taller than Landreth's Extra Early, stouter stems, more angular 
above; foliage slightly darker in shade, leaflets larger and often more 
than four, stipules clasping stem more closely, with more bloom, 
and with rounded rather than sharp tips; flowering two nodes higher 
up the stem; with pods averaging longer but otherwise similar, not 
holding freshness quite so well; and with much smaller peas and 
seeds. It was about as early as Landreth Extra Early but matured 
over a longer season, nearly three weeks. It gave a good yield, only. 

The disadvantages of Early Washington are those 
of Early Frame, joined with a rather inferior yield due 
to the small size of the peas. 

Earl) Warwick. Refs. 30, 31; Gard. Chron. 22 
(3rd ser.): 276. 1897; Mag. Hort. ."{:19. 1837; Rogers 
Veg. Cult. 226. 1839; Douglas Car. 1843; Mag. Hort. 
10:93. 1844; Jour. Hort. Soc. London 4:270. 1849; 
Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 535. 1863; Gard. Chron. 220. 
1865. Early Warwick seems to have been developed at 





GREEN ADMIRAL 





BUTE PETER 




'< 



\ 



AJAX 




k 



LINCOLN 




' 1* 
MARROWFAT 



SENATOR 



TYPES OF PEA PODS 



'Natural size) 



a 



THOMAS LAXTON 



ENGLISH WONDER 




PERFECTION 



t 




i 







MELTING SUGAR 




BISMARCK 



MAGNUM BONUM 



TYPES OF PEA PODS 



'Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



25 



Evesham, Warwickshire, previous to 1837, when it was 
called a great acquisition. It was listed in America in 
1843 and again in 1859. 

Rogers believed it "an improvement of Double 
Frame in the pod," a good early pea, prolific, about the 
height of Early Frame; it was tested in the garden of 
the Horticultural Society of London in 1849, and con- 
sidered " in general " Early Frame; but in later tests 
at Chiswich in 1860 Early Warwick was found " very 
different from the variety to which it was originally 
applied," the one raised near Evesham. It was then 
a " single-blossomed " pea, somewhat earlier than the 
" double-blossomed " l Frames of those days. It grad- 
ually lost its single-blossomed character and at time of 
the test had become identical with the ordinary Early 
Frames. 

Burr says " Now considered identical with Early 
Frame " but once at the head of early peas. 

It is described as 3 feet tall, of strong growth ; pods of good 
size, full, round, long, containing 7-8 peas, of excellent quality; 
hardy, early, and very prolific. It followed Sangster No. 1 in 
season. 

In 1865 Gardeners' Chronicle says it has superseded 
Early Waterloo, Charlton, Hotspur, Prince Albert and 
Early Kent (or May). It is very little, if at all, culti- 
vated anywhere now. 

Early Emperor. Refs. 36-41; Gard. Chron. 797. 
1845; 1. 1846; 382. 1848; 582. 1856; and 487. 1857; 
Hovey Cars. 1854 and 1859; Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 7:57. 
1855; U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. (Agr.): 314. 1857; Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 12:5. 1890. Syn. 13, Michaux de 
Hollande. In a survey of pea varieties in 1892, Early 
Emperor is reported as grown before 1837, but the 
earliest record we find is an advertisement for it in 1845, 
by Warner and Warner, Cornhill, London, undoubtedly 
the introducers. It was mentioned by Hovey in 1849, 
probably from English descriptions ; was listed by his firm 
in 1854; was tested in Mississippi in 1856; and reported 
in 1867 as doing well in Alabama where Eugenia [e], or 
Alliance, failed. It was evidently a favorite in the South 
where " pork and bacon peas " were popular. 

Earlier English descriptions give height 2 feet, " earliest in 
cultivation, hardy, good cropper, fine pods of delicious flavor; " 
later ones, " slender habit of growth always with single stem, 2}^ 
to 3 feet high, 8-10 pods, 2j^ to 3 inches long, as broad as Sangster 
No. 1, but appears slender because of length, generally single, 
perfectly straight as they approach ripeness, almost blunt-ended, 
with seven peas, white when ripe. Does not compare at all in 
earliness with Sangster's No. 1, and Dillistone's Early," and " more 
prolific but poorer flavor than Sangster's No. 1." 

In 1890 it was said to be " now dropping out of 
cultivation; " but in France in 1906, Denaiffe gives a 
quite full description of it as Michaux de Hollande, 
distinguishing it from Caractacus and Prince Albert. 
Denaiffe's description differs but slightly from those of 
what was probably the same pea grown here in 1884 
under the names " Dwarf Michaux de Hollande " and 
" Michaux ordinaire de Paris " (N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:251, 



253. 1885). Both were shorter-stemmed and plumper- 
podded than Early Emperor tested here recently from 
seed produced in France. 

Height, 4 feet; stem stout, angular; foliage abundant to dense, 
dark green, leaflets more often in 3 pairs than in previous varieties, 
large to medium in size, quite broad, often slightly toothed or notched 
on margins toward tip: stipules deeply clasping, slightly larger than 
leaflets, with sharp tips and heavy teeth one-third distance from base 
to tip, slightly whitened and with slight bloom; flowers at 8th to 
10th node, white, single or frequently paired; pods narrower, 
slightly more curved and more wrinkled than those of Early Frame; 
peas smaller; seeds smoother, and less often shaded green, but other- 
wise like those of Early Frame. The greater height than in earlier 
descriptions, and the slenderness of the pods, probably indicate 
degeneration in the modern strain, or poor selection. 

Early Emperor is still grown in France, as peas 
of this type are more popular on the Continent than 
they are in England or the northern sections of the 
United States. 

Prince Albert. Refs. 13, 51-55; White Cat. 1846; 
Gard. Chron. 559, 574, 630, 645, 662. 1843; and 373. 
1844; Mag. Hort. 10:91. 1844; Gard. Chron. 52, 67, 
199. 1850; Jour. Hort. Soc. Lond. 4:270. 1848; Mag. 
Hort. 16:67. 1850: Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 2:55. 1855; 
Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 544. 1863. Prince Albert has 
been a very famous pea. It was grown before 1837, 
but the first direct reference to it found is an advertise- 
ment in 1842 by its introducers, Cormack and Oliver. 
It came to the United States in 1845, and was listed 
within a short time by several seedsmen. From tests in 
the garden of the Horticultural Society of London it 
was considered a seedling of Early Kent, and pronounced 
the best early pea, preceding by ten days any other vari- 
ety sown. Its introducers called it a 42-day pea; but 
growers and seedsmen disputed for several years over 
the relative earliness of this strain, Superior First 
Early, Early Kent, Early Emperor, Double-blossomed 
Early Frame, Early Warwick, Early Hero, and Early 
May. Burr gives a rather detailed description of it and 
Denaiffe draws distinctions between this and other 
strains. 

Height 2 to 3 feet, more dwarf than older varieties of the group 
but requiring support; stem slender, very seldom branched, inter- 
nodes long; flowers begin 5th node, white, Burr says paired, Denaiffe 
usually single in distinction from Caractacus; pods in 6—7 tiers or 
circles around the stem, 2 to 2% inches long, straight or very slightly 
bent backward, round, fairly plump, tapering abruptly at both ends, 
well filled; peas 6-7, of excellent quality; seeds round, cream colored, 
nearly white about eye and along median line; very prolific and 
very early. 

Prince Albert was, at one period, the most popular 
of all the early varieties; and was cultivated in almost 
every part of the United States. As found in the 
gardens in 1863 it was not distinguishable from some 
forms of Early Frame and was being superseded by 
Daniel O'Rourke, Dillistone Early and other improved 
strains. Tho still cataloged by a few English and 
Continental seedsmen and recently grown in United 
States Department of Agriculture tests, it is probably 



1 " Double-blossomed " means, not that the parts of the flower were doubled, but that the flower stalk was branched, each of the 
two divisions bearing a flower — the condition we now speak of as flowers or pods in pairs or paired. 



26 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



no longer found in American gardens ; and was not grown 
at the Station. 

I ..rl> Kent. Refs. 56. 57; your. Horr. 1»:378. 
1872; Mag. Horr. 16:67. 1850; Hovey Cat. 1859; 
Rural N. Y. 12:271. 1861; New York Sta. Rpt. 1:86. 
1883. Syns. 7 tCharlton and Hotspur), 20 (first*. 35. 
51, 55 second and third . Tho available records do not 
show Early Kent until a year or two after Prince Albert 
was offered for sale, the latter was called the seedling of 
Early Kent when tested in the gardens of the Horticul- 
tural Society of London, so Early Kent must have been 
the older. It was grown very extensively at Higham, 
Kent, a very early locality, the combination of place 
and earliness giving the pea its name in London mar- 
kets. It was in America before 1850, but probably never 
as extensively grown, at least under its own name, as 
Prince Albert. It was grown and quite fully described 
by Prof. Goff, Horticulturist of this Station, in 1884; and 
was again tested here for three seasons beginning in 1922. 
Goff's description differs very slightly, in points 
covered, from the one made later. 

The plants were distinctly dwarfer, with some tendency to 
branching from the base, and seeds decidedly larger. The change to 
taller, unbranched vines and smaller seeds is quite plain evidence 
that the variety is returning with age to the original type. Early 
Frame or its predecessors. As grown at the Station in 1893 Bui. 69) 
it was one of the most productive first earlies. 

In the recent Station tests the plants were 3 1 ;; to 3 3 ( feet 
tall; stems slender, but becoming coarse, hollow and square towards 
tips, unbranched: foliage dense, dark to medium green, without 
bloom even on stipules and not whitened: leaflets and stipules like 
those of Early Frame; flowers and pods like those of Landreth 
Extra Early but latter more uniform in size averaging slightly longer 
and frequently containing one pea more; seeds smaller and more 
likely to show some green shading. Not as early by two or three 
days as Landreth and had a longer season. The yield was very 
poor. 

Now a wholly undesirable variety. 

Earlj May. Refs. 35, 62-64; Hogg Gard. Yt. 
Bk. It: 72. 1873. Early May was grown in England 
previous to 1837; was listed in America 10 years later. 
Hogg calls it a synonym of Early Kent. No satisfactory 
description was found except in late French sources. 

In the earliest of these the height was given as 3 ' :j to 3' 2 feet; 
flowers from 8th or 9th node; pods in 7 or 8 tiers, or circles, paired, 
straight, square-ended; peas 6-8, small; seeds round, white or sal- 
mon tinted, 130 or more to the ounce. It was a second early, a 
free and long bearer, and useful market gardener's pea. A quite 
recent description makes the plants decidedly shorter-stemmed, 
with pods borne very low and often in nine tiers. It resembles 
Caractacus. flowering at the same time but maturing more slowly, 
and more productive. 

Probably not now grown in America. 

Sutton Karl\ Champion. Refs. 68 70; Mcintosh 
Bk. Gard. 2:51, 56. 1855. Syns. 36,40,68-70. This 
Early Champion was advertised by Sutton in 1849, 
which is probably about the date of origin; and its 
similarity to other existing varieties was soon noticed. 
No American references to it under its own name have 
been found; but it may have been grown under one of 
its synonyms. The original type was said, a few years 
after its introduction, to be a variety of Early Frame 
and to have no merit over the original; and the improved 



type, introduced nearly twenty years later, was con- 
sidered identical with Daniel O'Rourke. 

As grown at the Station, from University of British Columbia 
seed, it was decidedly early, rather more dwarf but similar in most 
respects to the typical Frames; flowering low; with shorter pods, 
somewhat wrinkled when at best stage for picking, containing 
only 3-5 peas, considerably larger than those of many other extra 
earlies. The seeds were also rather large, often slightly pitted, 
and many were distinctly shaded grayish green over the orange 
colored cotyledons. 

Sangster No. 1. Refs. 77-85; U. S. Dept. Agr. 
Rpt. 1856; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 533. 1836; Hogg Gard. 
Yt. Bk. 11:72. 1873. Syns. 34, 70 (Daniel O'Rourke, 
Sutton Improved Early Champion), 73, 77 85. Sang- 
ster No. 1 has been one of the most famous peas, both in 
England and America. It was first announced in 1851 
by Hay, Sangster & Co., and was, within a few years, 
probably the source of more comments, reports of trials, 
lists of synonyms, etc., than any other pea. It, with 
Dickson First and Best, was said to show no frost injury 
in a trial where several other strains were severely hurt. 

It came to America very promptly, being tested in 
Mississippi in 1856 and there found the best of nine 
varieties. Burr gives the name only as a synonym of 
Daniel O'Rourke; which Hogg reverses; but both 
strains have been repeatedly cataloged since then by 
many American seedsmen. 

Fragmentary descriptions of the Sangster differ slightly among 
themselves but not more so than do plants of it grown at the 
Station from seed obtained in British Columbia and in England. 
From the first, seeds sown May 22, pods were ready in 42 days, 
and from the second lot, sown on the same date in another season, 
in 49 days. When both were sown on May 1, in the same year, 
the British Columbia strain was three days earlier than the other, 
— 54 and 57 days. 

The British Columbia strain was slightly taller, flowered 
two nodes higher, and was rather smaller in pod, with somewhat 
fewer seeds to the pod, slightly larger peas and seeds, and the latter 
are all bright cream in color, while the English seeds were duller 
cream with a decided admixture of light green. Early descriptions 
emphasize the whiteness of the flowers of Sangster No. 1 , as separat- 
ing it from a few other strains; but this does not apply generally; 
and no marked differences separate the plants grown at the Station 
from those of varieties previously described. It has the same 
approximate season, plants 2 to 2 '4 feet high, medium to slender, 
usually unbranched stems; abundant dark green almost bloomless 
foliage, with regular leaflets; single or occasionally paired, medium 
sized, plump, blunt -ended pods, slightly lighter in color than the 
foliage; and the same light green, almost round peas, which change 
to cream colored, occasionally light green seeds, all with orange- 
colored cotyledons, and averaging about 125 to the ounce. 

The rather small pods and comparatively poor 
yields of Sangster No. 1, and other varieties directly 
grouped with it, make them now unworthy of con- 
sideration. 

Dani.l O'Rourke. Refs. 90-98; Mag. Hort. 21: 
397. 1855; Rural N. Y. 12:271, 1861; Hawley Cat. 
1868; Gard. Mo. 22: 113. 1880; Vilmorin-Robinson Veg. 
Gard. 495. 1920; Cent. Exptl. Farm. (Can.) Bui. 34: 
20. 1902. Daniel O'Rourke ranks with Sangster No. 1 
as a much discussed pea; and the two in recent years, 
at least, have been considered synonymous, choice of 
name depending on preference or prejudice of the user. 
According to David Landreth, Geo. Charlwood, an Eng- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



27 



lish seedsman, said seed of Daniel O'Rourke came from 
America; and Landreth maintains that the seed was 
derived, through Early Burlington, from his own Extra 
Early. Except for this Landreth letter, which is very 
straightforward and positive, credit for Daniel O'Rourke 
is given to Waite, who offered it in England in 1853, as 
being a week earlier than Early Emperor, with large pods 
and a better yielder. It was named from the Derby 
winner of the previous year, but neither origin nor his- 
tory are given. It was listed in America within a year 
of the English advertisement and was shown before the 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society the following sea- 
son. It soon became widely known, perhaps to a con- 
siderable extent through the name, and in 1880 was 
regarded as " still the most popular among myriads of 
varieties of peas, new and old." Many of the partial 
descriptions attempt to separate Daniel O'Rourke from 
Sangster No. 1, Early Princess, Prince Albert and other 
varieties; but it is very doubtful that any of these dis- 
tinctions would hold under changed conditions for the 
varieties compared. As early as 1868 both English and 
American strains of O'Rourke were recognized. It was 
carefully described in 1884 by Prof. Goff, whose charac- 
ters, where comparable, differ but slightly from those of 
plants recently grown at the Station for four seasons. 
Improved Daniel O'Rourke was also grown at the Sta- 
tion in 1893 (Bui. 69), for the World's Fair display, and 
called " one of the best of the old varieties." In the 
later comparisons, seed from the Idaho Station proved 
to be untrue, or a degenerating strain, but that of Im- 
proved Daniel O'Rourke gave plants typical of the origi- 
nal variety as commonly described. Plants from the 
Idaho seeds were tall, with long, sharp-pointed leaf- 
lets and " rabbit-eared " stipules, unbranched, flowering 
very high on stem, and producing long, many-seeded 
pods, with very small seeds, — all signs of inferiority. 
As is true of most " Improved " strains, that of Daniel 
O'Rourke was soon pronounced identical with the origi- 
nal. As Landreth claims identity, at origin, of Daniel 
O'Rourke with Landreth's Extra Early, it is of interest 
to note how very few are the points of difference between 
the two as grown at the Station in the same season and 
in adjoining rows tho not exactly side by side. 

The Landreth variety is given first in each comparison : Height 
2 1 l '-2}4', 2'-2 1 J '; stem round, angular; branches lacking, few; 
flowers 8th node, 8th-l lth; pods single or few pairs, single; pods 
2 1 , 2 T S inches, 2> 4 3 inches; not always filled to tip, filled; peas 
medium size, large; sown April 27, ready 57 days, 59, and in another 
season, sown May 1, 56 days, 56: crop good, good to very good. 
In practically every case, differences can be accounted for by slight 
variations in vigor of seeds from different sources; and in the 
remainder of almost 100 points of possible difference the check 
marks were the same. 

First Crop. Refs. 120; U. S. Comr. Agr. Rpt. 
1865:29. 1866; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:76. 1873. 
First Crop was distributed by Carter in 1864, but 
in 1865 was acknowledged by both Carter and Sutton 
to be identical with Sutton's Ringleader. Separately, 
each seedsman obtained from the same grower (now 
unknown) stock of a very carefully selected strain of 
peas, which each distributed under a new name. Both 



for some time maintained that the strain was distinct 
from others, like Sherwood's Railway and Dillistone 
Early, with which most authorities considered it identi- 
cal. Ringleader was perhaps most widely distributed in 
England and general references will be found under 
that name. The name First Crop came to America 
first; and the strain under that name was carefully 
described by Prof. Goff in 1884; none of the characters 
he gives, however, would separate the strain from many 
others of the Extra Early group. His synonyms are 
those commonly associated with the two names, and he 
says the strain was a selection from Early Kent. It 
was also grown here in 1893. 

Ringleader. Refs. 119-121; Gard. Chron. 233. 
1866; Denaiffe L. P. P. 107. 1906; Jour. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. 32:336. 1907. As stated under First Crop, Sut- 
ton's Ringleader was distributed by Sutton in 1864, and 
the two varieties were declared identical in 1865; but 
the strain was claimed in 1866 not to be the same as 
other varieties of the group and period. The descrip- 
tions given do not suffice to show distinctions that wculd 
not disappear under other conditions or within a few 
years. Denaiffe makes comparisons of First Crop with 
Caractacus, which was advertised in 1865; but admits 
that the latter variety varies greatly and that some 
strains of it cannot be distinguished from First Crop 
i Ringleader). 

An improved strain of Ringleader was distributed 
some time before 1907, which was pronounced in the 
Royal Horticultural Society gardens only a " fine 
stock " of the old variety. 

No records of Ringleader were found in American 
literature, but Improved Ringleader was grown at the 
Station for two seasons. 

Seeds larger and more pitted than seeds of similar varieties 
grown in the United States; foliage decidedly lighter green than 
that of Landreth Extra Early, leaflets broader and stipules larger, 
pods the same in size, slightly broader, not so well filled to the edges, 
and with fewer peas, so that these were larger than those of Extra 
Earlies commonly run; 48 days from late sowing to picking, 56 
from early; crop was good. 

Dickson First and Best. Refs. 122, 123; Gard. 
Chron. 1185. 1864; Ibid. 172. 1866; Ibid. 701, 1172. 
1867; Ibid. 660. 1868. Dickson (1) announced this 
pea in 1854, contemporaneously with the preceding 
two strains. It was soon declared identical with them; 
and pronounced by the Royal Horticultural Society, in 
1866, " a very pure strain of Dillistone Early; " in 1867, 
" a first class selection from Sangster No. 1," two days 
later than Dillistone, a stronger grower and free bearer; 
and in 1868, " a good selected stock, same as Daniel 
O'Rourke." The petals of most of these strains were 
evidently creamy in color, as special attention was 
called to the whiteness of flowers of Carpenter Express 
and Sangster No. 1. The latter variety and this First 
and Best were said to show no frost injury where other 
varieties were severely affected. It was first grown in 
the United States, as First and Best Early, in 1865. 

Dickson First and Best was grown here for two 
i seasons, from seed received from the Idaho Station. 



28 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Rather late, quite large-poddt 1 3 inches), productive 

Extra Early, with wry well colored, medium sized to large peas. 
In United States Department Agriculture tests the pods were 
more curved at the end than in most varieties of the group. 

( aractacus. Rets. 124 128; Bliss Cat. 1870; 
Country Gent. 36:124. 1871; Gard. Mo. 16:40. 
1874: Gregory Car. 1885; Benary Car. 1905 6. 
Caractacus was advertised in 1865, by Waite, with 
note, '"stock exhausted this year;" so it undoubtedly 
originated earlier. One commentator says it was 
carefully selected by Waite from Daniel O'Rourke, 
another that it is Dillistone Prolific type, but Denaiffe 
says it has always yielded better than Daniel 0"Rourke 
or Prince Albert, its only fault being irregularity in 
appearance and earliness. with marked tendency to 
deteriorate. The list of synonyms shows its similarity 
to several other varieties, if not identity with them. 
It does not seem to have attracted as much attention in 
England as several others of its type and time; but 
came to America soon, was listed by many seedsmen, 
mentioned several times by agricultural periodicals, 
and tested by Prof. Goff for two or three years. It went 
also to both France and Germany. 

Plants grown at the Station in 1923 and 1924, from foreign 
seed, were considerably shorter than those described by Goff in 
1884, raised from American-grown seed, but notes by him on the 
crop of 1885 show plants only a few inches taller than those grown 
here later, 2 to 2' 4 feet. His description agrees with our own in 
indicating somewhat more glaucous foliage than that of Landreth 
Extra Early or Early Frame, larger stipules, and pods decidedly 
lighter in color; but his pods were larger than ours, 2 to 2? 2 inches, 
against slightly over or slightly under 2 inches; he found 5 7 peas 
to a pod, we found 3-6; his seeds were larger and smoother than 
ours, but agree in being sometimes shaded green. His crop matured 
" rather early." ours in 49 to 54 days. In spite of small pods 
Caractacus gave good or very good yields. 

Philadelphia Extra Early. Refs. 131 135; Evans 
Cat. 1868; Country Gent. .'$6:134. 1871; Buckbee 
Cat. 1894: Buist Cat. 1913; Condon Cat. 1918. The 
history of Philadelphia Extra Early is obscure. It was 
listed by the Department of Agriculture in 1865 and 
cataloged commercially in 1868, but without added 
information. In 1885 it was said to be a standard early 
variety in Philadelphia markets, and in 1918 was called 
an improved strain of Landreth Extra Early, which, 
from date of first mention and place, seems quite likely, 
but Prof. Goff, in describing the pea in 1884, says it is 
probably from Daniel O'Rourke, 1 and thru the latter 
from Early Kent and Early Frame. In Buist's catalogs, 
Philadelphia Extra Early is said originally to have been 
called Hancock's. If a conjectured origin for Hancock 
p. 84 is true, Philadelphia can be traced directly to 
Landreth Extra Early. Ferry makes Philadelphia 
Early a synonym of Burlington, and the latter came from 
Landreth Extra Early. 

In 1884, at the Station, height 1 J4 to 3 feet as compared with 
two strains of it recently tried here, both from American -grown 
Ked, in which the heights were l'i to 2 feet, and 2 to 2]/ 2 feet 
respectively. The descriptions, separated by 40 years, agree in 
certain characteristics in which the pea differed a little from others 
of the type: Branches few. basal: foliage similar in color to Land- 



reth Extra Early, a little lighter in shade than several others of the 
group; pods nearly 3 inches long, end very blunt Goff i ;" square " 
recent, color light, peas fewer. The seeds of the old strain same in 
color as those of today, but showed a slight shade of green in some 
cases, which was lacking in both the parent and crop seeds in the 
recent tests. This factor has no separatory value between closely 
allied varieties. Goff called the strain " very early," but figures he 
gives for it in 1883 show it required 64 days from April 21 to edible 
condition: while the strains grown in 1922, '23 and '25 required 
54 to 56 days from sowings a week or ten days later than the 1883 
test, and only 49 days when sown May 22. Goff said, " not pro- 
lific," and our crops were checked " fair," only. Philadelphia 
Extra Early, around Geneva, at least, does not compare favorably 
with several other Extra Early strains. 

East Hartford. Refs. 10, 143-146. This strain 
was listed in 1868 by Hawley, but may be older. It 
was found in 1889 to be one of the better peas among 
80 varieties tested in Vermont, — a reputation it still 
deserves in this group, according to our tests. In 1914 
it was said to be popular among Hartford market gar- 
deners as an extra early, smooth pea, — a prolific bearer 
of rather small pods containing peas of good quality. 

Our three years' test of it does not emphasize the earliness, but 
it gave a " very good " yield; the pods were borne singly, were small, 
1' , to 2'.| inches long, rather broader, less plump, and with rounder 
ends than those of some other strains, containing 4 to 7 peas, rather 
better in color than the average, and of good size. The seeds first 
sown were small 178 to the ounce I, but those of the resultant 
crops were much larger, cream colored, with some shaded green. 
In other characters it is indistinguishable from Landreth Extra Early. 

The strain is evidently well fixed, without the 
tendency to deterioration which is a fault of so many 
varieties. 

Emerald Gem. Refs. 147, 148; Thorburn Cat. 
1873; Rural N. Y. 13:554. 1883; Vilmorin -Robinson 
Veg. Gard. 496. 1920. Emerald Gem was introduced 
by Sutton in 1871, after several years' trial and some 
temporary naming. It was similar in color of foliage 
and pods to Girling's Danecroft Rival, and was held to 
be a revival of that old variety; but Sutton apparently 
sustains his contention that Emerald Gem had no con- 
nection with Danecroft. In all respects but color of 
foliage it is an Extra Early; but total lack of bloom on 
stems, foliage and pods gave them a peculiar, semitrans- 
lucent, glazed, green color. It was very early. 

It was introduced into America in 1873, and culti- 
vated to some extent as a curiosity because of its peculiar 
coloration. 

According to Denaiffe (L. P. P. 28, 1906) a dwarf 
form of Emerald Gem (Nain Emeraude tre"s hatif) 
only 10 to 12 inches high, is known in France. 

Dexter. Refs. 151-154. Dexter was said by 
Gregory to be " an American pea sent out by a gentle- 
man who is probably the largest grower of seed peas in 
America," John H. Allan; and a letter from the seed 
company bearing Allan's name, of Nov. 22, 1926, says 
the pea was introduced in 1870. According to Allan's 
later catalogs, the original name was Allan's Early 
Dexter, though this appears last in the list of synonyms. 
Like Racehorse, Eclipse, Daniel O'Rourke, Maud S 
and Sunol, this pea honors famous horses. Only general 



See ascribed connection of Daniel O'Rourke and Landreth Extra Early, pp. 26. 27. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



29 



characteristics of the strain have been found in print, 
and it is now seldom, if ever, listed. 

Ferry First and Host. Refs. 157, 158; Rural N. Y. 
12:553. 1883; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 2:87. 1884; S. Dak. 
Sta. Buls. 85:4. 1904; and 91:5. 1905. First and Best 
was announced in 1882, and grown the next year at this 
Station and other testing grounds. It was compared 
with other varieties and found similar in some respects; 
but since it was not pronounced identical with any, it 
was undoubtedly a rather distinct strain. The descrip- 
tions do not enable us to distinguish it from other vari- 
eties of the time, and sometimes disagree, showing that 
all characters, at least, were not constant. 

Its pods were said to be somewhat smaller and lighter in color 
than those of Henderson First of All, but leaves of same size, and 
larger than those of Carter New. Some of the seeds were consider- 
ably wrinkled. It was not specially early but ripened most of the 
pods promptly. Cooking tests in South Dakota for two years 
agree in assigning poor quality to the peas. Not tender, sweet, 
nor juicy, very hard, very starchy and tasteless or " rank " in 
flavor. 

It is still cataloged and appears to be a superior 
strain of Ferry Extra Early. Selection has undoubtedly 
been maintained, and the stock probably improved to 
keep pace with more modern types of the group. It was 
not grown in recent Station tests. 

Iowa Challenge. Refs. 159; Iowa S. Co. Cat. 
1899; also letter from this firm, Nov. 30, 1926; Mich. 
Sta. Spl. Bui. 31 : 24. 1905. Iowa Challenge was intro- 
duced, as Challenge, previous to 1883 by the Iowa Seed 
Co., the name being changed in 1889 to Iowa's Challenge 
and later to Iowa Challenge. The firm says later that 
the variety is dwarf and a favorite with the Des Moines 
market gardeners. As grown in Michigan it was found 
tall, with 10 to 12 pods per vine and 4 to 7 peas per pod. 

Grown here for three seasons, it was only 1^2 to 2 feet high, 
with long-stalked, large pods 12}^ to 3 inches), borne singly; peas 
5 to 7, medium sized to large, light green, becoming cream colored 
when dry, with some shaded green. It varied considerably in 
season in the three years, but, on the whole, would generally follow 
some of the other strains, and crops were only fair. 

Henderson First of All. Refs. 162; N. Y. Sta. 
Rpt. 2:86. 1884; Mich. Sta. Bui. 37:41. 1890; S. 
Dak. Sta. Buls. 85:4. 1904; and 91:5. 1905. This 
First of All was introduced in 1883 by Henderson 
and tested the same year at this Station and other 
trial grounds. Sown at different dates at three places 
it was ready in the following times: 

From April 6, 67 days; from April 21, 61 days; and 
from May 1, 52 days; exactly the same in season as 
Ferry First and Best in each locality. What is probably 
the same First of All was recently grown at the Station 
for three seasons, and pods were ready: When sown April 
27, in 55 days; May 1, 54 days, and May 22, 50 days. 

Quite dwarf, lJ4~2} / z feet, occasionally 3, in early tests, and 
1 3 4 feet in later tests; stem very slender, rarely branched; foliage 
medium green, not glaucous, stipules sometimes whitened, much 
larger than leaflets; pods single, at 9th node (recent), 2 to 2j-£ inches 
long, paler than foliage, appearing slender but well filled, with blunt 
ends and distinct straight tip; peas 5 to 6, medium in size, light green, 
slightly oval, or oblong when compressed in pod; seeds cream 
colored over orange colored cotyledons, with obscure radicle. 



Some of the comparisons given make the plants taller by an inch 
than First and Best, with rather more peas by weight. The cook- 
ing tests in South Dakota show no material improvement in quality 
of the peas over First and Best. 

The strain is still listed and grown. 

Rural New Yorker. Refs. 165, 166; Gard. Chron. 

22 (new ser.): 57, 1884. Rural New Yorker was devel- 
oped in 1883, or shortly previous, by Cleveland, and in 
1885 was distributed as a premium to its subscribers 
by the periodical for which the pea is named. It was 
tested in the Rural Experiment Garden for two years 
before introduction and reported very early, with heavier 
pods and peas than those of First and Best or First of 
All. Seed of it was advertised in England in 1884 and 
it later reached France. In all three countries it was 
soon pronounced the same in all essential respects as 
some of the existing strains, such as First and Best, 
Philadelphia Extra Early, First Crop or Prince Albert. 
As grown at the Station for three years of the last 
four, it showed no distinctive characteristics. 

The peas were perhaps a little larger than those of the average 
Extra Early, slightly indented by compression in the pods, oblong 
rather than round, producing seeds more pitted than most others 
of the type. The vines were not specially vigorous and sometimes 
showed considerable yellowing. The pods were ready in about 
56 days from late April or early May sowing, and pickings could 
be made for more than two weeks, the long season being useful 
in private gardens but a detriment in growing for market. 

Breck Excelsior. Refs. 168; Rural N. Y. 43: 
414. 1884; and 45:218. 1886; S. Dak. Sta. Buls. 
85:4. 1904; and 91:5. 1905. The first mention of 
Breck Excelsior was in 1882 at a meeting of the Mas- 
sachusetts Horticultural Society, where it was pro- 
nounced a splendid variety, as early as Daniel O'Rourke. 
Other references of the time confirm its earliness, and 
say it is not as tall by 6 inches as other Extra Earlies. 
Later references indicate partial degeneracy of the type 
in increasing height of vine; and note the poor quality 
of the peas. 

It is not the same as Early Excelsior of the same 
seedsman, a wrinkled variety. 

Maud S. Refs. 173-177. Allan claims to have 
obtained Maud S from Early Dexter "by hybridiza- 
tion " and careful selection, in 1885. No information 
is given as to the other parent of the hybrid, if the pea is 
one; Gregory calls it a " sport " from Early Dexter; 
while others make it synonymous with First and Best, 
Earliest of All, and Morning Star. The denting of the 
seeds spoken of by Allan, and found in recent tests at 
the Station, with the grayish green shade of the peas, 
indicate the possibility of influence from some pea out- 
side the Extra Early group; but in every respect but 
these, including season and length of picking, it is true 
to the type. It is said to be very resistant to cold. 
The crop has been reported all the way from very good to 
" one of the poorest in yield." The Station tests found 
it only " good." Possibly from the name, Maud S 
has been quite popular and is still frequently listed. 

Burpee Extra Early. Refs. 180; and letter from 
Burpee Co. This pea was first tested at this Station 
in 1886, but was introduced in 1881 by Burpee, being 



30 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



specially selected from Philadelphia Extra Early. 
Later this variety, with many others tested here, was 
found to resemble Philadelphia Extra Early so closely 
that there seemed no reason for calling them distinct. 
From the production data given it seemed about inter- 
mediate in the group of very similar peas, with more 
pods to the vine but less peas to the pod than Phila- 
delphia, but much less of both than Eureka Extra Early. 

Lightning and Giant Lightning. Refs. 181 185; 
Rural N. Y. 16:468. 1887; U. S. Dept. Agr. B P. I. Bui. 
21:288. 1903: Barr Car. 1912: Price & Reed Cat. 
1913; Farmer Cat. 1914. Lightning was distributed by 
Carter about 1886: and came almost immediately to the 
United States, as seeds from two sources, both American, 
but stock probably imported, were sown at this Station 
in 1887. The two lots varied in productivity, one bear- 
ing one-fifth more pods to the vine, and averaging more 
peas to the pod: but they were otherwise alike. They 
were compared with three varieties of the Alaska type 
from which they were said to differ only in seed color. 
Other references remark the similarity of Lightning to 
First Crop. First and Best, Prince Albert and other 
Extra Earlies. but usually credit it with marked earliness 
which was also shown in the 1887 Station tests. The 
pods were decidedly small, a defect which was remedied 
about 1908 by Carter's introduction of Giant Lightning. 
This has pods nearly twice as large and more numerous 
than those of its predecessor, and larger peas, but is 
otherwise the same. This was grown here in 1926. was 
early, and gave a fair crop of large, light colored pods 
of typical, but slightly broad, extra early type, contain- 
ing 4 to 7 very large, whitish green peas. In this variety, 
when well grown, the rather too prominent tip of the 
pod of Lightning is reduced in proportion, if not in 
size. It has been grown in America since 1913, at least. 

Lightning Extra Early, of the Moore & Simon 
Co., is probably the same as Carter's Lightning, tho 
the catalog emphasizes the green color of the pods. 

Seeds of a Price & Reed Lightning pea were 
secured from a New York State seedsman, and the 
strain was grown here for two seasons. 

It proved from six to eight days late for a typical extra early; 
was very dwarf ljj to l}i feet . unbranched; foliage medium to 
light green, decidedly whitened and rather scanty, often with only 
two or three leaflets; first flowers at 7th or 8th node, which were 
cream colored, single, or rarely paired; pods were short 1 

■ ches . very plump, straight, with blunt to square ends, light 
green; peas 3 to 5, large, rather oblong, indented, light green to 
medium green: crop seeds were, as was very often the case on 
Station soil, very decidedly larger than the seeds sown, and often 
deeply pitted. 

The lateness of this pea, dwarfness of the plants, 
and sparseness of the foliage would seem to separate it 
from Carter's Lightning. 

Pedigree Extra Early. Refs. 186. 213; Bolgiano, 
J. Cat. 1911; Allan Cars. 1913-15: Berry Car. 1920; 
and letters from Field, Nov. 24. 1926; Livingston, Nov. 
20. 1926: and Keeney, Nov. 24, 1926. Pedigree, 
from a current strain of Extra Early, was developed 
rom that firm's first single-plant selection, 
starting about 1893. carried for further selection until 



about 1900, and distributed by several seedsmen. 
When announced it was considered " the best strain 
of Extra Early ever offered to the trade," very uni- 
form, about 2 ' 2 feet high, pods 2 ' ■> to 3 inches long, 
well filled, with 6 to 7 peas; not as early as Sunol or 
Maud S. 

Pedigree Extra Early was grown at the Station for two or 
more seasons from seed from different sources, including the origi- 
nator. In each case it was a rather dwarf strain. 1 ' $ to 1 ! i feet; 
with a few basal branches, producing flowers and pods singly, rarely 
in pairs, at the 6th or 7th node: pods of typical shape in all strains, 
but in one strain averaging nearly half an inch longer and with 
one more pea per pod, the peas and the seeds, also, being distinctly 
larger in this strain, and larger than in most Extra Earlies. the other 
strains being typical in these respects. The originator's strain 
was about a day earlier, also, both being somewhat earlier than 
Landreth Extra Early: but crop yields, because of a larger number 
of pods, favored the other strain. 

The Livingston letter referred to above gives First 
in Market as a synonym of Pedigree Extra Early, which 
is probably incorrect. (See First in Market, beyond.) 

The Henry Field Seed Co. says its Improved Extra 
Early is Pedigree Extra Early. 

First in Market. Refs. 187, 188; and letters from 
Livingston, Nov. 20, 1926, and Keeney, Nov. 24, 1926. 
Livingston introduced First in Market about 1886, 
when a sample was sent to this Station for testing. 
This company says in a letter, " The N. B. Keeney 
& Son Co., Leroy, N. Y., were the originators of First in 
Market and the name that they used for the variety is 
the Pedigree Extra Early." This is probably a slight 
error, as according to the Keeney letter work on Pedigree 
Extra Early did not start until 1893, and First in Market 
was known in 1886. Previous to 1893, however, the 
Keeney Co. had developed another improved strain of 
Extra Early, which was named Extra Early K. B. 
[Keeney's Best], and this was probably the strain 
Livingston secured and named First in Market. 

It was found not distinct from Philadelphia Extra 
Early; but it is still retained in Livingston's and a few 
other catalogs; and seed of it was secured recently and 
sown for three seasons. This strain and Philadelphia 
were practically identical, with date of maturing the 
same and both crops checked " fair to good." 

Best Extra Early. Refs. 190 192. In the spring 
of 1888 this pea was distributed by Burpee to about 
3,000 growers for testing; but was not regularly placed in 
commerce until the next year. Only numerical data 
for it are given in the Michigan bulletin. When sown 
March 9, it required 119 days to picking, yet was called 
" very early;" and it produced only a medium crop. In 
France it was found very like Prince Albert, with pods 
same form and size, lighter-colored foliage, larger peas 
but poorer yield, and much earlier. It was grown at the 
Station from 1922 '25, part of the seeds for the first test 
coming from British Columbia and part from Burpee. 

Seeds of both lots were more or less pitted, even slightly 
wrinkled. The foreign ones were much larger and all beautiful cream 
in color, while those grown in the United States were considerably 
mixed with green-shaded peas, and very much smaller. These differ- 
ences disappeared almost entirely in seeds from the two crops, the 
British Columbia stock becoming more green and the domestic 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



31 



stock decidedly larger, on Station soil. The pods were of very 
good size, frequently reaching 3 inches, and the crops were " very 
good," decidedly above the average, but in other respects, both 
strains were typical Extra Earlies, possibly a day earlier than most 
others. 

Summit. Refs. 195 197. Summit was intro- 
duced, probably prior to 1889. by Northrup. It was 
tested in that year at this Station and has been grown 
here again for three seasons. The successors of the firm 
introducing the pea say in catalogs that it was 2 ' ■_> feet 
high, earliest, most even in maturity, and with the 
largest pods of any extra early variety; but according to 
a recent letter, they discarded the variety " many years 
ago." Its curved pods might place it in the Scimitar 
group. 

The early catalog statements are. in general, confirmed by the 
first Station tests which adds that the foliage was light green, pods 
usually single, considerably curved, 2-2 ] •> inches long, slightly 
wrinkled: peas small, smooth: ready in 51 days, even when sown 
April 18, picking for more than a month, and " enormously 
productive." 

The strain must have deteriorated in 30 years; for as grown 
here recently, from seed from the same firm, it is merely a typical 
Extra Early, slightly taller. 3 feet, a very poor producer, with slightly 
larger than average pods, not specially early and with much shorter 
season than in 1889. 

Bergen Fleetwing. Refs. 198, 199; Kans. Sta. Rpt. 
1889:152. 1889; Gregory Cat. 1890; N. J. Sta. Rpt. 
1898:147. 1898. The synonym given by Tracy. Gren- 
ell's Extra Early Bergen Fleetwing, connects the pea with 
Grenell. but credit for it is usually given to Gregory; 
since he speaks of having " raised " this pea, and in 
English pea literature " raised " usually means origi- 
nated. In the same reference Gregory calls Bergen 
Fleetwing a " new " pea; but says " a great favorite 
with market gardeners on Long Island," which could 
hardly be true of a really " new " variety. 

A description of the pea, collected from several sources which 
agree in the main, makes it vary from 1 } i to 3 feet in height: with 
slender, unbranched vines; foliage light green, or slightly bluish 
green; leaflets 2-A, smooth, entire, rather obtuse; pods usually 
single 1 ' i to 2 ' 2 inches long, rather broad, plump, straight or slightly 
curved, lighter in color than the foliage; with 3-7 peas averaging 
5.22 from 100 pods in Kansas), seeds yellow, smooth. Season 
almost if not quite as early as that of Alaska, and picks for over a 
month; very productive. 

Evidently a typical Extra Early of very good type, 
but now superseded. 

Eureka Extra Early. Refs. 206, 207; Dreer Cat. 
1894; Rural N. Y. 5 1:314. 1895; and letter from 
Dreer, Dec. 8, 1926. Eureka Extra Early, very distinct 
from Eureka, was introduced in 1879 or 1880 by Dreer. 
It was a selection from Philadelphia Extra Early. A 
single plant selection made in 1900 is basis of present 
stock, considered much improved. Eureka Extra Early 
was tested at this Station in 1886 and considered not dis- 
tinct from Philadelphia Extra Early. The data for pods 
per vine, 4.60 and 9.40, respectively, for Philadelphia 
and Eureka Extra Early, and of peas per pod 6.01 and 
6.35, show the latter to have been greatly more produc- 
tive; and the same comparison holds for the early crops 
of the two varieties as grown here in recent years. 
Eureka being specially noted as one of the most produc- 



tive in first picking of any Extra Early; tho the total 
crop, by reason of its short season, was only fair to 
good. In the Rural Experiment Garden it gave " most 
peas of any early round pea ever tried." Dreer says 
that it is also good for a late fall crop. It is a typical, 
decidedly short-strawed, productive member of the group, 
in season with most others, and ripening promptly. 

The Dreer firm says in a letter, quoted under Extra 
Early Pioneer, that latter is synonymous with Eureka 
Extra Early; but they differed as grown here. 

Extra Early Market. Refs. 210, 211; S. Dak. 
Sta. Buls. 83:5. 1904; and 91:4. 1905. Extra Early 
Market was introduced before 1889 by Thorburn. In 
1896 it was tested in the Rural Experiment Garden; 
but the comparison was made with a wrinkled pea, 
Station, with which it agreed in season, and exceeded 
by one-fourth in yield; but it was equal in quality only 
to the best, smooth, extra early peas. 

In connection with the South Dakota cooking tests, 
which sustained the last statement, data are given to 
show the variety not especially early, 2 ' 4 to 2 ' L > feet high, 
with 3-inch, moderately plump pods, often with 6 or 
7 peas to the pod, which held a good color in cooking. 
As grown at this Station, it was very close to the group 
type in all respects except that the pods were more 
rounded at the ends than blunt; crop fair. 

First and Best. Refs. 214-220; Farquhar Cat. 
1892; Tait Cat. 1918. Syns. 20 (second), 98 (third), 
131, 134, 135, 187, 216, 218, 220. First and Best 
possibly, but not certainly, traces back to Dickson First 
and Best ; but many American references and synonyms 
seem to warrant listing the varieties separately. Leon- 
ard's First and Best of All probably varies only in the 
name. Almost no early descriptions of the strain are 
given, but it is considered " an improved type of Daniel 
O'Rourke," " of same type as Rural New Yorker," or 
" Rural New Yorker almost identical " and " Dillistone 
Early a sub-variety; " and was, therefore, a typical 
Extra Early at least as far back as 1889. 

It has been grown here recently, from seed from three sources, 
differences in the listed names indicating possible differences between 
" First and Best," " Selected First and Best," and " Extra Early 
or First and Best: " but no distinctive characteristics were found 
for any of the three ; nor any separating the group from others of 
! the class. All were single-podded, only fair to good in yield, 
requiring about 56 days to first picking when sown April 27 or 
May 1. 

Liiihtniiij* Excelsior (Refs. 222, 223) was intro- 
duced by Wood about 1888. It has been grown here 
for four seasons since 1922, using seed obtained at two 
different times from the introducer. It appears to be a 
decidedly variant strain, though part of the differences 
may be accounted for by unlike dates of sowing and 
changed climatic conditions. 

Seeds for the first strain were very bright cream over orange 
under color. Sown April 27 or May 1 in successive years the 
first strain gave edible peas in 57 days, was 2 to lYz feet high; 
had abundant dark green to medium green foliage, not whitened 
and almost bloomless, with four leaflets; bore first flowers at 9th 
node, and mostly single pods, but a few paired ones, on rather long 
stalks, the pods being from 2 J 2 *° almost 3 inches long, hardly 



32 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



plump, not filled to tip. with pointed to rounded ends, containing 
6 or 7 rather large, round, light green pens; gave only a fair crop. 

Seeds for the second lot were mostly dark cream in color but 
some were very light green over light to medium yellow under- 
S a n Ma] J .' in lx>th years, which should have given a much 
shorter period to edible maturity than for the other strain sown 
much earlier.' pods required the same time, 57 days to picking; 
the plants were only 1 ' i to 1 ' _> feet high, with less and lighter 

,1 foliage, glaucous and distinctly whitened, often with only 
two leaflets; flowers began at the 7th node, were always single on 
short stalks, producing pods from ■ « to ' , inch shorter than those 
of the first strain, but plump, square-ended, and with one or two 
less peas which were smaller but decidedly more indented and of 
better color. The abundance of the small pods gave a better yield 
" good to very good " than that of the larger podded strain. 

The earliness of one strain may offset the greater 
yields of the other. 

John L. Ref. 229. This pea was said by its 
introducer, Hastings, to have produced from one peck 
of seed sown at St. Augustine. Florida, one bushel of 
pods in 30 days from sowing. This is the shortest 
growth period we find in any authenticated and reliable 
record, and also the most tropical location for such a 
test, the precocity and climate evidently having a very 
close relationship. John L, according to Hastings' cat- 
alog of 1924 has held the record of earliness since 1896, 
probably about the date of introduction. Grown at 
the Station it has proved almost identical with Iowa 
Challenge, but with shorter stalks and seed somewhat 
more wrinkled and pitted. It also, in the north, ripens 
its crop slowly, edible pods being found for five weeks. 

Sunol. Refs. 230; Mich. Sta. BuJs. 120:24. 1895; 
and 131:31. 1896; N. J. Sta. Rpt. 19:147. 1898; Allan 
Cat. 1913 14. Sunol was introduced in 1893 by Allan, 
who is said by Gregory to have " produced more new 
peas than any one (elsel on this side of the Atlantic." 

Early descriptions picture a semi-dwarf vine, l s g to 3 feet 
high, sometimes branched from the base, a very early but rather 
shy bearer of pods 2 to 2} o inches long, round, nearly straight, 
usually " rounded out " at point, with 5 to 6 rather large peas 
which change to light-cream colored seed, slightly dented and pitted. 

These characters were nearly all the same for the variety 
grown here recently for two seasons; but the vines were still more 
dwarf 1 '4 to 1 ' j feet , yield of pods " good," but pods short 1 . 
to 2 ' . inches , and rather poorly filled, with rounded to blunt ends. 

Among earliest of varieties, but otherwise not to 
be recommended. 

I ctra Earl) Pioneer. Ref. 231. Extra Early 
Pioneer was introduced by Dreer,-' prior to 1894, who 
claimed for it remarkable earliness, with pods of medium 
size and peas of fine flavor. 

Tests of it made here, during two seasons, with seeds from 
the same source and sown at the same time as those of Sunol, 
show it from two to four days later than that variety. It was, 
however, decidedly more productive, ranking among the best of 
the Extra Earlics in this respect because of the numerous, well- 
filled, blunt- to square-ended pods, slightly longer than those of 
The picking season was short. The vines were 2 to 2'^ 
feet tall, with dark green, glaucous foliage, so much whitened as 
to appear lighter. 



Lightning Express. Ref. 232. The first record 
we find of Lightning Express is in Buckbee's 1894 
catalog, who probably introduced the variety or gave 
it the name, shortly before that date. 

As grown here for three seasons it was a dwarf, distinctly 
early, rather uneven-podded strain, the pods ranging from 2 to 
_' . inches in length, and from medium to plump in width; in other 
respects a typical Extra Early. One crop was checked good, and 
two very good. 

Prolific Earlj Market. Refs. 241 243; S. Dak. 
Sta. Bui. 85:5. 1904; Darling 8b Beahan Cat. 1913; 
Allan Cat. 1914; Rice Cat. 1913. In a letter to 
Maule in 1901, Keeney says: " About 10 years ago 
the writer selected a very prolific plant of an extra 
early pea, having a very long pod," from which Prolific 
Early Market resulted. First and Best, according to 
another authority, was the " extra early pea; " of 
which the new one is a very productive strain. 

Descriptions made previous to its growth here say it is the 
most productive white-seeded extra early, with from 40 to 50 pods 
on many vines, three or four days later than the old Extra Earlies. 
about 2 ' i feet high, with light green, straight, round, saddle 
backed, square-ended pods, 3 inches long, averaging about 7 
peas, which when dry are of light cream color, round and smooth. 

As grown here for three seasons the vines were not quite so 
tall and were unbranched; the foliage was medium in amount and 
medium green in color; the pods 2} 2 to 3 inches long, the peas 
whitish green to light green in color, 6 to 7 in pod; and the seeds 
were occasionally slightly flattened from pressure in the pod, and 
some were shaded green. As when introduced, it was a second 
early; but it matured its pods promptly. It seemed to have lost 
some of its former productiveness. 

Prolific Extra Early, as listed by Burpee, described 
by Denaiffe, and grown here for three seasons, is appar- 
ently the same as Prolific Early Market. Prolific Early, 
listed by Farquhar in 1904, may be different, but data 
given do not suffice to say. 

Rice Extra Early. Refs. 244, 245; and Rice Cars. 
As indicated by the name, this strain of Extra Early 
has been distributed by Rice, since before 1901, both for 
market gardeners' and canners' use. It is continuously 
re-selected and kept uniform in type. 

As grown here it was 2 '4 to 2J2 f ect high, with a few basal 
branches; abundant foliage rather darker in color than medium 
green, slightly glaucous; flowers at 8th to 10th node, practically 
always single; pods seldom reaching 3 inches, very plump, often 
saddle-backed, blunt to square-ended, well filled with 5 to 6 peas, 
between light green and medium green in color, rather large for the 
type, grading about the same as Alaskas for canning; seeds slightly 
pitted. Same season as Alaska and about the same in productivity. 

Monster Podded Extra Early, with pods said to 
reach 4 inches in length, is similar to the above except 
in slightly greater height, and larger pods and peas. 

First Early. Refs. 246; Portland Seed Co. Car. 
1909. This pea is described by Griffith and Turner in 
1902, but does not appear in Tracy's bulletin listing 
varieties of 1901, so it was probably introduced in 1902. 
No record, other than in the introducer's catalogs, has 
been found, but it was grown here in 1922, 1923 and 



Other peas showed a week or ten days difference in time of maturing in favor of late sowing. 

from firm, Dec. 8, 1926. says Pioneer was synonymous with Eureka Extra Early; but date of introduction lost by destruc- 
tion of old records. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



33 



1925. It differed in no material respect from Rice 
Extra Early: but the pods were somewhat shorter, and 
not quite so plump, resulting in distinctly smaller peas 
and seeds, but the yield, owing to a longer picking season, 
was as good, if not better. The second reference says 
this is the first early round pea with the sweetness of 
the wrinkled varieties. The quality was not tested here. 
Saxonia. Refs. 256, 257; Allan Cat. 1913-14; let- 
ter from Allan, Nov. 22, 1926; Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
36:723. 1910; letter from J. M. McCullough's Sons, 
Nov. 1, 1922. Saxonia was advertised in America about 
the same time, 1912, by two western seedsmen, both of 
whom speak of it as new. The Allan Seed Co. says in 
a letter that its seed of Saxonia came from David Sachs, 
Quedlinburg, Germany, probably the originator. The 
company grew the pea for several years but discontinued 



it because of small demand. This is probably the same 
as the Saxonia tested in the garden of the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society in 1910, which is similar in many essen- 
tials, but seems to differ in others. 

The American Saxonia was described as a strain of Extra 
Early maturing about the same time as First and Best, free from 
"wild" (degenerating) tendencies, about 2j^ feet high, very hardy 
and vigorous, with pods 2 :! 4 inches long or more, slightly curved 
at tip, generally in pairs. 

As grown here in three recent seasons it was an early, not 
earliest, rather dwarf type, unbranched, with pods often larger 
than most Extra Earlies (2j^ to 3 J/4 inches), but somewhat uneven, 
slightly curved, rounded at the ends, not very well filled, with 6 
to 7 peas when well grown, which are rather large, more or less oval 
longitudinally, and light green in color. It was fairly productive. 
The blossoms are sometimes in pairs, the pods are rarely so. 

Ohio Chief is a synonym of Saxonia. 



TOM THUMB GROUP 



The Tom Thumb peas, as the name indicates, are 
very dwarf in plant, now rarely exceeding a foot in 
height, especially on lighter soils. In the history of the 
type variety, however, several peas are included that 
were originally of medium height, or even tall, but 
closely connected, historically or through synonymy, 
with the Tom Thumbs of England or America. Other 
varieties are grouped here, also, that differ in many 
respects from the type, and have little historical or 
other connection with the Tom Thumbs; but all are 
white-seeded, dwarf or semi-dwarf, second early or 
midseason peas, often with white or whitish pods, 
sometimes with pointed or rounded rather than the 
more common blunt ends, short to medium length, 
rather broad and generally quite plump. 

MAJOR VARIETIES IN TOM THUMB GROUP 

Spanish Dwarf. Refs. 1-6; Lawson Agr. Man. 
76. 1834. The first direct reference found to Spanish 
Dwarf is an American one; but it was undoubtedly 
known long before 1827 in England and France, since 
the earliest references in these countries speak of it as 
a long-established variety. It was grown for many 
years in America. Burr described it in 1863, speaking 
of it as a favorite in small gardens, but inferior in quality 
to Burbidge Eclipse or Bishop Long-pod. 

It was very dwarf, variously said to be from 9 inches to 2 feet 
tall, with erect stems, often with spreading branches from near 
the base, to which it owes the synonym Dwarf Fan, having short, 
strong internodes, small, dark green leaves, strong tendrils, short 
petioles and peduncles, flowers mostly in pairs, producing short, 
broad, slightly flattened, but well-filled pods. It was a second 
early or midseason pea and a fair to good cropper. The peas were 
only fair in quality and the seeds small, smooth and white. 

Bishop Dwarf. Refs. 11-16; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:252. 1885; Vilmorin-Robinson Veg. Gard. 510. 1920. 
As with its probable parent, Spanish Dwarf, we find 
Bishop Dwarf first referred to in an American catalog; 
but it originated near Perth, Scotland, in 1825, being 
discovered, as a single plant in a field of Spanish Dwarf, 
by David Bishop. It was listed in several American 
catalogs previous to 1845, and was grown at this Sta- 



tion as late as 1884, when Prof. Goff spoke of it, as an 
" old variety, not much grown at present." 

It was very similar to Spanish Dwarf, varying in height like that 
variety and occasionally with two main branches from two joints 
below the flowering node which grew almost as tall as the main 
stem. The pods were said to be 2j^ inches long, quite character- 
istic in shape, enlarging progressively for one-third their length, 
then remaining of same diameter almost to the square end. In its 
early history it was very productive, bearing paired pods, ready 
from midseason on, with 7 small peas; Prof. Goff found it a poor 
producer. It was generally quite inferior to its successor, Bishop 
Long-pod. Prof . Goff in 1884 also described an "Early Dwarf," 
evidently from seeds furnished by Vilmorin, which from its 
synonyms, Nain hatif and L'Evergne (undoubtedly intended for 
L'Eveque, French for Bishop) and the description, could only 
have been Bishop Dwarf, tho its identity with the latter was not 
recognized. 

Tom Thumb. Refs. 17-29. Tom Thumb traces 
to Flanagan's Early in England and Strawberry in 
America, though differing so greatly from these varieties 
that history, not characteristics, makes the connection 
apparent. Flanagan Early (earlier forms unknown 
though allied to the Frames) was cultivated in England 
before 1850; a white-seeded, straight-podded, mid- 
season pea, with a vine 2 J 2 to 4 feet tall; and from it 
developed a somewhat shorter-vined, earlier type, Ring- 
wood Marrow. From Ringwood Marrow or from the 
original Flanagan Early arose, probably by selection 
alone, strains known as Beck Gem (first advertised in 
1853), Turner Dwarf or Royal Dwarf, in which the 
length of vine was further reduced and the season 
slightly advanced. In 1858, a more improved type was 
announced by Paul as Tom Thumb; and Beck Gem in 
its improved form also received the same name; so that 
two types of Tom Thumb were in cultivation in England 
at the same time. 

One or the other of these types, possibly both, were 
introduced into the United States by Landreth, about 
1850, probably under the name Beck Gem; but later 
importations of the improved stock brought also the 
name Tom Thumb. The two strains and the name met 
in America a strain of the Strawberry pea, even more 
dwarf than the imported stocks, only 6 to 9 inches tall, 



34 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



and with peas of fair quality altho those of most of the 
strains of Strawberry were inferior. References do not 
prove definitely that the name Tom Thumb was used 
for this or other strains of Strawberry before the stocks 
and name came from England; but rural periodicals, 
during the decade of the Civil War. wire filled with 
assertions and denials of the identity of the " American 
Tom Thumb " with Beck Gem and the English Tom 
Thumb, and of the two latter with each other. 

The two strains coming from England, under the 
influence of the hotter, drier days of our pea season 
became still further reduced in height and advanced in 
earliness. These strains undoubtedly became mixed, 
or confused, with strains of Strawberry, including the 
American Tom Thumb, and Barr Tom Thumb; and 
seed stocks of the American strains were, according to 
Burr, sent to England, crops grown there, and seed 
reimported to America. From this confusion, Tom 
Thumb became the group name of many strains of 
peas, all with more or less dwarf plants, stocky -stemmed, 
short-jointed, usually branched but sometimes not, 
second early, with small, dark green foliage, and fairly 
large, straight or very slightly curved, rounded to blunt 
ended pods, which contained small, round, cream 
colored or yellowish seeds. Several peas of the same or 
very similar characteristics have been developed in 
France, Germany and Holland, and names of these 
have been given by writers on the pea as synonyms of 
Tom Thumb. 

Prof. Goff. in 1884, described Tom Thumb. 

Height 1 ' j to 2 feet but many strains much more dwarf; stem 
strong, much branched, with short internodes; foliage abundant, very 
compact, rather deep green, neither glaucous nor whitened, with 
upper leaflets smaller; peduncles 1 to 2 inches long: pods paired, 
lighter colored than foliage, 2 to 2 ] 2 inches by ! ■> inch; peas 4 to 
6, whitish green, compressed when full grown, about :! * inch longest 
diameter; seeds cream colored, roundish, very smooth, ' ( inch in 
diameter, with radicle showing distinctly, and weighing about 117 
to the ounce. It was prolific, rather early, and ripening over a 
long season. 

In England Carter's Improved Tom Thumb and 
Sutton's Long-podded Tom Thumb were found in trials 
of the Royal Horticultural Society, late in the " 60's," 
to be no improvement over the original Paul's Tom 
Thumb. In America, however, an Improved Tom 
Thumb, introduced about 1885 by Gregory, had con- 
siderably taller vines, was much more productive than 
the common strains, a few days later, with larger, 
better filled pods, resembling those of the old Bishop 
Dwarf; that is, longer, tapering for one-third length, 
then rather broad to tip. 



Tom Thumb as grown at Geneva 3 years: Plant 10 to 15 
inches tall; stem stout, erect, oval to angular, smooth, with very 
short internodes and a few basal branches; foliage abundant, dark 
green, very slightly glaucous, with 2-4 medium sized rather broad 
leaflets, and much larger, lightly clasping, slightly whitened stipules 
rounded at the tips, and bearing a few irregular teeth toward base; 
Dowers from 7th or 8th node, numerous, medium to large, white; 
pods usually single, occasionally in pairs, on long, rather thick 
stalks: 1 ' •_> to 2 inches long, narrow, plump, smooth, round, slightly 
curved, regular, filled to edge but often not to tip, end blunt to 
square when well filled, sometimes with short straight tip, some- 
times without, lighter in color than foliage: peas 5 6, uniform, 
whitish green to light green, smooth to slightly indented, oval; of 
poor quality, being starchy, dry and rather tasteless; seeds smooth, 
round, medium to small (135-145 to ounce i, grayish or bluish 
cream, sometimes tinged green, cotyledons light yellow to light 
orange; radicle moderately distinct. When sown early ripens in 
56 to 60 days, cropping 18 to 21 days; fairly productive, or 
even good yielder for so small plants. Can be grown in rows 
10 to 12 inches apart. Does best on heavy soils and reported well 
adapted for winter sowing in south; but in New York too poor 
yielder and peas of too poor quality to permit recommendation. 
Improved Tom Thumb is also still cataloged and grown, tho not 
extensively. 

Bishop Long-Pod. Rtfs. 31-35; Mcintosh Bk. 
Gard. 2:55. 1855; Hovey Cat. 1859; Burr Fid. Gard. 
Veg. 523. 1863; Thompson Card. Asst. 319. 1859. 
This pea, known in England before 1850 and command- 
ing favor for a long time, originated, according to 
Thompson, with David Bishop, as a cross between 
Bishop Dwarf and a marrow pea. It was soon tested 
by the Horticultural Society of London and found much 
superior to Bishop's older pea; and this view was sus- 
tained by later trials by the Society and in this country. 
It came here within a decade of its origin and was still 
grown in America at least as late as 1902. 

It was tested and described at this Station in 1884, 
and again in 1926, the latter under its French synonym, 
from seeds grown by the U. S. Department of Agri- 
culture at McMillan, Mich., which probably traced quite 
directly to France. The differences in the variety, 
grown more than 40 years apart, were surprisingly 
few, the most noticeable being a decrease in length and 
width of the pods in the late test with an increase in 
plumpness. 

In this test the plants were 2 feet tall, branched at the base, 
with dense, medium green foliage, slightly whitened, generally 
paired pods, borne on 7th to 9th node, ready as second early, 
lighter in color than the foliage, 23.' 2 ; , inches long, medium to 
plump, straight, with blunt to square ends, less pointed or rounded 
than most others in the group, and with 4 to 7 peas in the pod, of 
medium size, whitish green in color and of fair quality. Now 
seldom grown either in America or England, but listed in French 
and German catalogs. 



MARROWFAT GROUP 



The name Marrowfat, as applied in America, refers 
to an entirely different type of peas from those now 
known by the name in England, altho the early use of 
the term was the same in the mother country as on this 
side of the Atlantic. 

General characters of American Marrowfat 
peas. — The group here discussed includes, in the main 
the large, white or yellow, smooth peas used, largely 



in the dry state, for soup-making and cooking or baking 
with pork or bacon. They are mostly midseason to 
late, tall and rather heavy in vine, with many branches 
in the type group, but with none in many allied varieties, 
bearing the first flowers and pods high up on the stem, 
the latter usually single on long, thick stalks, broad, 
square-ended, often becoming quite plump before the 
peas are of edible size, ordinarily rather few on the vine, 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



35 



but containing, when ready to pick, 5 to 7 or more 
large, oval, light green to good green peas, much better 
in quality than the smaller peas of the Extra Early 
group. The seeds are usually half larger to nearly 
twice as large as those of the Extra Earlies, more nearly 
round than are the green peas, usually with very smooth 
skins, tho often more or less angular or irregular in shape, 
and occasionally dented. 

Included in the group of Marrowfats, also, are black- 
eyed types, with seeds generally smaller than those of 
the white group, each seed showing a distinct, small, 
black, or very dark brown, spot around the hilum or 
eye. The black-eyed peas and the small-seeded and 
more or less dwarf types of the white-seeded Marrow- 
fats are more generally used for field culture than for 
the garden or market. 

History. — The history of the varieties of this 
group involves so many complexities that no really 
satisfactory summation of it can be made. 

First, the earliest English classifiers of peas of whom 
we know, Gerarde {Herbal 1597) whose separation is 
very general, and Parkinson, give so little detail for 
groups that their characters and their relationship to 
each other are very uncertain ; and the varieties included 
in each are not specified. Their " Rounceval pease " 
and " White Rouncivals " might be considered the 
ancestor of the Marrowfats; but Mawe-Abercrombie, 
writing a century and a half after Parkinson, includes 
in one rather indefinite group, two types of Marrowfats, 
Tall and Dwarf, and the white Rouncival, as currently 
cultivated, thus indicating that at that time the Mar- 
rowfats and Rouncivals were considered distinct. Others 
believe the Rouncivals to have been wrinkled peas. 
Parkinson's Hasting pea is excluded from consideration, 
by its lack of hardiness, as ancestor of either the Extra 
Earlies or the Marrowfats, since both stand cold well; 
and by its earliness, also, as progenitor of the Marrow- 
fats, in particular, since these are midseason peas, or 
later. 

The Egg pea, though corresponding in many respects 
to the Marrowfats, was not listed by Parkinson, and was 
in any case a black-eyed variety, and so hardly in 
ancestral line with the white-seeded type; and the seeds 
differ greatly both in size and shape from those of Black- 
eyed Marrowfats. 

Later, the history of the Marrowfats is still further 
complicated by the English use, beginning at an unknown 
date or period, of this term to cover the tall, wrinkled, 
rich-flavored white and green peas of which the Knight 
Marrows are typical examples. This double use of the 
term in English pea history, without definite indication 
of the time of change, makes it impossible to say whether 
many varieties called Marrow or Marrowfats during 
the middle half of the nineteenth century were smooth or 
wrinkled peas. 

American seedsmen, importing varieties from Eng- 
land, brought with the peas the name or the classifica- 
tion as Marrowfats, even though the seeds were wrinkled 
and green; and the brief catalog descriptions, emphasiz- 
ing season, pod shape and pea quality, rather than seed 



characters, left no printed clue to aid in the funda- 
mental grouping of varieties. 

The earliest references of which we can be positive, 
in Marrowfat history, are Townsend's naming (1726) of 
Black-eyed Marrowfat and the phrase in Stephen 
Switzer's Catalog for 1731 |reprint, only, seen]: "For 
the third sowing Marrowfats," which would indicate 
that even then they were very well known, needing no 
description. These are followed by the Mawe-Aber- 
crombie reference to Tall and Dwarf and Large White 
marrowfats. These names, with various slight changes 
and additions, such as Early and Royal have come down 
to us from those remote times, and are so interwoven 
that it is out of the question to straighten the tangled 
thread of their history. Switzer also noted Spanish 
Mulato and Nonsuch which apparently belong in this 
group and Mawe-Abercrombie lists Egg and Crown. 
Lady Finger was also very old. Russell in 1827 places 
Marrowfat in America. During the succeeding century, 
about 50 more varieties or names were added to the 
smooth marrowfats. 

MAJOR VARIETIES IN MARROWFAT GROUP 

WHITE SEEDED SECTION 

Tall Marrowfat. Refs. 3-10; Booth Cat. 1810; 
Lawson Agr. Man. 78. 1834; Gard. Mag. No. 77. 
1836; Rogers Veg. Cult. 230. 1839. It is impossible 
to fix certainly upon any ancestor for the white-seeded 
Marrowfats, altho White Rouncival is given as a 
synonym by several authorities, but this is doubtful; 
or to separate the individual members of the group. 

The earliest specific reference to Tall Marrowfat, 
after its listing by Mawe-Abercrombie, is in the catalog 
of Wm. Booth of Baltimore; and it was, and still is, 
given a more prominent place by seedsmen on this 
side of the Atlantic than in England. It was generally 
recorded as being 6 to 7 feet tall, seldom branched, 
decidedly later than the so-called Dwarf Marrowfat, 
with large, broad pods containing from 7 to 9 large 
peas of excellent quality, a fair to good bearer and 
lasting over a long season. One authority says seeds 
more spherical than those of the Dwarf Marrowfat, less 
wrinkled, and when compared in bulk, smoother and 
more glossy; while another says seeds are more oval. 

The tall type was not grown in the early tests of 
varieties at the Station, but trials of several Marrow- 
fats have been made recently, under slightly varying 
names and from seed supplied by different seedsmen, all 
but two proving practically identical in seed size, shape, 
color and surface; in height of vine; in showing basal 
and medial branches instead of being unbranched; in 
season (70 to 80 days to edible maturity, according 
to time of sowing and weather conditions), in size and 
shape of pods and peas, and in general crop production. 

Two lots of seed, however, both called " Marrow- 
fat " only, one from the Idaho Station where it had 
been grown in field culture, and one from a southern 
seedsman, were decidedly earlier than other strains 
sown at the same time, started flowers and pods lower 
on the vine, and contained about one more pea to the 



36 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



pod in pods of the same size and shape, making both 
peas and seeds smaller and somewhat more wrinkled. 
These two strains correspond, in seed characters, more 
nearly to the descriptions of Dwarf Marrowfats, but the 
vines were as tall, if not taller, than those of the other 
strains. If differences associated with Tall, Large, and 
Dwarf Strains ever existed, they have either disappeared 
or no longer follow the names. 

future re f erence, a rather detailed description of what 
train of White Marrowfat pt.is is here given: Seeds 
nn, smooth, round to oval, large 80 to the ounce . whitish 
cream in surface color over orange cotyledons, and with prominent 
radicle: stem averaging 5 feel in height when first pods ready, 
adding length later, moderately Stout but requiring support, angular. 
with short to medium length nm modes, and from few to many 
basal and medial branches; foliage abundant, dark to medium 

n in color, with little bloom on leaflets but considerable on 
stipules, leaflets usually four in number, large to medium in size, 
long to medium in shape; stipules from slightly to considerably 
larger than the leaflets, of the same color and not usually whitened, 
moderately clasping, and with teeth about one-third distance from 
base to rounded tip; tendrils not characteristic, moderately promi- 
nent; flowers begin about 18th node on unbranched stems, white, 
borne on long, stocky peduncles, both singly and in pairs. The 
pods. also, are often in pairs, on thick stalks, with medium sized 
receptacles and straight, long, rather narrow, flat sepals; are from 

• .1 ' j inches long, broad to medium in width, moderately 
plump, considerably wrinkled, round to oval in cross-section, very 
straight or slightly recurved, regular, filled to tip and edge, blunt 
to square at the end, with a distinct, straight tip; of lighter color 
than the foliage 'light green to whitish green '; and contain 5 to 7 
medium to large, round, smooth, whitish green peas, of fair cooking 
quality, rather better than Extra Earlies. Sown April 27 in a cool, 
moist season, the strain produced edible peas in 72 days and other 
pickings for two weeks, giving a " good " crop. Other strains 
were ready for picking in from 70 to 81 days; but sown three weeks 
later in a warmer, dryer season, pods were ready in two weeks less 
time, and the difference between the strains practically disappeared. 

Large White Marrowfat. Refs. 3, 11 13. Since 
Large White Marrowfat was mentioned by Mawe- 
Abercrombie with the tall and dwarf types, it is evident 
that there was some separation between the three at 
that time, but descriptions would not, now, allow of 
drawing any line between the large and the tall types, 
except that the former is usually given as about 5 feet 
tall instead of 6 to 7 feet for the latter. 

Dwarf Marrowfat. Refs. 3,4, 14 26; Booth Cat. 
1810; Landreth Cafs. 1824, 1832, 1892; Rogers Agr. 
Man. 228, 230. 1839; Cot. Card. 2.>:291. 1861; 
Card. Mo. 36:112. 1884. As with other types, a 
Dwarf Marrowfat may have been included in Switzer's 
" Marrowfats "' and is certainly mentioned by Mawe- 
Abercrombie; while the subsequent references coincide 
closely with those for Tall Marrowfat, but are much 
richer in synonyms, which would seem to indicate a 
wider range of true varieties. Reading the descrip- 
tions, however, they agree noticeably in everything but 
height, and the heights differ so widely where a strain 
under a distinctive name is grown in different localities 
r in different seasons, that we are able to segregate 
very few real varieties, or find that these varieties no 
longer maintain their identities. 

The Royal Dwarf group appears for a time, at least, 
to have approached true dwarfness. but we have been 



unable to find a strain grown by present day seedsmen 
that is much below our limits for tall peas, 3'^ to 4'_> 
feet as grown under Station conditions. Brown Dwarf 
Marrowfat, as described by Gregory and Landreth, 
was even more dwarf in its early history, less than 2 
feet, and occasionally only a foot and a half; but Goff 
in 1884 gave both Royal Dwarf and Brown New Dwarf 
Early Marrowfat as synonyms of the variety he grew 
and described as White Marrowfat, which ran from 
3 to 5 feet in height. His description for this variety 
differs in none of the other characters given from our 
detailed description under Tall Marrowfat. Rogers says 
as far back as 1839 that Dwarf Marrowfat is wrongly 
named, as 4 to 5 feet in height, but had been so called 
for a century; and that it is nearly extinct in true form, 
those sold for it being taller and having rounder and 
smoother seeds, those of the original type being much 
larger, with a rough coating. 

American Dwarf, listed in England in 1841, is 
evidently one of our native forms, 3 feet tall, and said 
to be very good, a good bearer, and about a week later 
than Bishop Long-pod. This tendency to increasing 
height, decreasing size of seeds and smoothing out of 
the seed coats is inherent in the Marrowfats, and only 
most careful selection and roguing will maintain any- 
thing approaching true dwarfness. The inferiority of 
the Marrowfats in quality as compared with the newer 
wrinkled peas has decreased their popularity and so 
lessened the attention given the breeding of seed stocks. 

Victoria Marrow. Refs. 59-64; Country Gent. 
18:190. 1861; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 550. 1863; 
Ann. Hort. 125. 1889. Rogers in 1839 says that 
Royal Victoria, later given as a synonym of Victoria 
Marrow, was recently introduced, but the latter name 
does not appear until 1844, and seems to have been 
first listed in America in 1859. The variety, under 
various names, soon spread widely in England and 
crossed to France. It remained in cultivation in 
America for at least thirty years; and seems to have 
been one of the best of the Marrowfat group, with very 
large pods, generally paired, produced abundantly 
before or in midseason and containing 5 to 8 large peas. 
It was of the unbranched type and bore its pods well 
toward the top of the stem, above the 14th or 15th 
node and occasionally noticeably clustered. The seeds 
were sometimes distinctly shaded olive or greenish, and 
often indented as tho inclined to wrinkle, these char- 
acters accompanying better quality. 

Grimstone Egyptian. Refs. 66, 67; Jour. Hort. 
Soc. Lond. 1:270. 1849; Gard. Chron. 27:236. 
1886. About 1845 Grimstone claimed to have come 
into possession of some peas found in the dust of an 
hermetically sealed Egyptian vase presented to the 
British Museum by Sir Gardner Wilkinson, and sup- 
posed to be 2844 years old. These were advertised by 
Fames in 1846 as Large New Mummy, and in 1848 some 
of their original seeds or their progeny were presented 
by Grimstone to the Horticultural Society of London 
for testing. The resulting plants did poorly, but seemed 




Typical vine and pods 



EXTRA EARLY AND ALASKA TYPES 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




Leaf lender 



LATE ALASKA 



'Two-thirds natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



37 



so similar to those of Dwarf Branching Marrow that in 
1849 the new-old variety was grown beside the well- 
known one, when no differences could be detected in 
growth, foliage, flowers, pods or seeds. The descrip- 
tion secured at that time makes the variety about 2 
feet tall, with strong, short -jointed, stems, broad leaflets, 
large cream-colored flowers on short peduncles, nearly 
straight. " flattish " pods, ready in 103 days (rather 
short period* from Mar. 21, moderate in number, and 
each containing about 6 medium-sized white seeds. This 
description, with others previously given of Branching 
Marrow, makes Mummy a marrow-like variety; but 
the name is also connected with Rose or Crown, which 
had forms with white flowers and seeds and with 
bi-colored flowers and dark seeds. 

The Andersonian Mummy, noted in an American 
periodical, is there said to have originated from peas 
collected in Egypt and supposed to be 2000 to 3000 
years old, which were given by a Gen. Anderson to 
John Gardener of Guernsey and increased by him. 
This, also, is said to have been tested by the Horti- 
cultural Society of London, but the reference may have 
been, by error, to the tests of the other Mummy, if 
there were really two of them. The Mummy and 
Crown peas grown in America, especially in Canada, 
have been considered field peas. 

Paradise Marrow. Refs. 70-72; Thorburn Car. 
1861; Country Gent. 20:126. 1862; Jour. Hort. 
18:380. 1872. Paradise Marrow, Excelsior Marrow 
and Champion of Paris were introduced successively in 
1851, 1857 and 1860, by Stuart and Mein, Wm. Knight, 
and Sutton, respectively; but by 1861, these names, 
with several variants, were regarded as synonyms. 
The variety was grown in America under all three 
names. 

Hogg, in 1873, commended Paradise Marrow very 
highly. 

It was a strong-growing Marrowfat pea, 5 to 6 feet tall, single 
stemmed or occasionally branched at the top, edible in second early 
or early midseason with pods which averaged 8 to 10 to the vine, 
were usually single, 4 inches long, straight or slightly curved, very 
broad, filled well but slowly, rather whitish, and contained 7-9 
large peas which became large, uneven, compressed, irregular or 
egg-shaped, whitish seeds, with a thick, smooth skin. 

From its earliness, productivity and large size of 
pods, peas and seeds, it was considered much superior 
to the Early Frame types, to Auvergne, and to Shilling 
Grotto. 

Missouri Marrowfat. Refs. 21, 74; Burr Fid. 
Card. Veg. 543. 1863; Ferry Cat. 1873. Tho usually 
considered synonymous with Royal Dwarf Marrowfat 
and a sub-variety of Large White Marrowfat, Burr 
calls Missouri Marrowfat a variety of American origin; 
and describes it as: 

Medium height for a Marrow, strong and vigorous, usually 
single-stemmed, but occasionally branched: with single or paired 
pods, nearly straight, wrinkling on the surface as they ripen, and 
containing about 6 large peas which change to seeds larger, paler, 
more wrinkled and much more regular in size than ordinary types. 
It gave edible peas in about 75 days from May 1 and was very 
productive. 



Leopold II. Refs. 77; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3: 250. 1885. 
Leopold II is an old pea of unknown origin, but firmly 
fixed and easily kept true to type. In its light-colored 
pods with very dark green sutures, it is similar to Ring- 
wood Marrow, a variety connected with the history of 
Tom Thumb. Its greater height of vine removes it from 
that group, the later season and rounded ends of the pods 
exclude it from the Extra Earlies, and the straight pods 
prevent classifying with Scimitar type peas. 

In our tests it grew 3 to 3 ' 2 feet tall, the pods are often paired, 
3 to 3} 2 inches long, broad, with a very heavy, wide straight tip, 
containing 6 or 7 peas, rather more like those of the Extra Earlies 
than typical Marrowfats. The variety is noticeable for the rapid 
tho late blossoming and quick filling of the pods, so that the crop 
can all be harvested within two weeks. The light color of the pods 
counts against them, tho the peas really hold freshness very well. 

Marblehead Early Marrowfat. Refs. 80, 81; 
N. J. Sta. Rpt. 149. 1898. This selection from White 
Marrowfat was introduced by Gregory about 1890, who 
said it had been grown by the 1 unnamed) originator 
for 50 years. 

As first grown it was probably shorter in vine, with moder- 
ately long, very plump, blunt-ended pods, uniformly filled with 6 to 
8 peas and quite early. As grown in Kansas in 1898, and recently 
at this Station for three years, it showed no outstanding charac- 
teristics to separate it from the other Marrowfat strains. The pods 
were possibly somewhat longer, on the average, broad rather than 
plump, square-ended, and small-tipped, with 7 to 9 peas. It was 
not specially early, 62 days to edible maturity from a very late 
sowing, 10 to 12 more from earlier seedings; and was nearly, if not 
quite, as tall as other strains. 

Improved Supir Marrow. Refs. 84-86; Allan 
Car. 1913. The Improved Sugar Marrow probably 
originated sometime previous to 1905, as it was men- 
tioned in several places that year. It was grown here 
for two seasons; and was practically indistinguishable 
from other Marrowfat strains, tho two distributors say 
it is quite unlike Royal Dwarf, White-eye Marrowfat 
or Black-eye Marrowfat. 

It gave a good to very good crop of quite long, moderately 
plump pods, very slightly curved, with blunt to square ends, con- 
taining 6 to 7 large, round oval, medium green peas. In Kansas 
tests the peas were found of rather poor quality, not bearing out the 
" Sugar " of the name. The seeds are small, cream-colored and 
slightly pitted. 

It seems to be a favorite in the South, being much 
grown around Baltimore and Norfolk. 

BLACK EYED SECTION 

The Black-eyed Marrowfat peas are probably fully 
as old as the solid white types. In 1726, Townsend, 
an English seedsman, spoke of the variety Black-eyed 
Marrowfat. Switzer, in 1731, mentioned at least two 
peas which evidently belong in this group. In describ- 
ing these and other early varieties of the type, it is very 
doubtful that the chronological order given is correct. 
The Black-eyed Marrowfats are now very seldom grown 
in the garden; but in certain sections are leading members 
of the field-pea group; and are used for soup-making 
and baking as well as for stock feed. 

E««. Refs. 91-95. The Egg pea, tho exceedingly 
old, still exists. It was grown at the Station in 1926, 



38 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



from seed raised on the U. S. Dept. of Agriculture test 
grounds at McMillan, Mich., under the name Bohncn- 
erbsen, which is the- German for " Bean pea," one of 
the synonyms of Egg. 

Old descriptions make the vine as tall or tailor than the Tall 
White ' '. lit as grown lure it was the same height or a 

little shorter, rather strong growing, with a few basal branches and 
dense foliage; flowered low. 10th 11th node, and lion ., \<i\ good 

if iv-ds. ,>f narrow type in general, but With rounded rather 
than blunt ends because of failure of the pods to fill well. They 
averaged only 3 peas -' 6 ; but these were very large, flattened, 
oval, oblong, egg shaped, or short kidney-bean shaped, attached at 
ud. The seeds were brownish, or greenish cream, somewhat 
wrinkled, and showed plainly the black hilum, making a pea too 
characteristic in shape and marking to be mistaken for any other. 

The variety was pronounced worthless in England 
75 years ago, tho previously useful as a " poor man's 
pea." That it has been continued, except as a curiosity, 
must be ascribed to the different taste of certain con- 
tinental European peoples, who grow in quantity many 



peas hardly considered edible by the English and 
Americans. So far as records show, except on trial 
grounds, the Egg pea has never been grown under that 
name in America; but the Southern Cultivator in 
1847 mentions Patagonian, which is synonymous with 
Egg. 

Black-eyed Marrowfat. Refs. 102 110; Mich 
Sta. Bui. 131:30. 1896. The application of the descrip- 
tive name for this type of pea seems to have been more 
common in the United States than elsewhere; and the 
particular strain here discussed may have originated 
in America, tho the Michigan reference says it was 
introduced from England by Thorburn. 

1 1 is similar to the shorter-vined White Marrow- 
fats, except for the black eye, smaller size of the seeds 
and slow maturing. Now used almost exclusively for 
field culture. Two strains of it grown here varied 
somewhat in size of seeds sown; but the resultant crops 
were practically indistinguishable. 



ALASKA GROUP 



General Characteristics. — Alaska peas and others 
of this group are, in the main, green-seeded Extra 
Earlies. The slender, unbranched or slightly branched 
stems of moderate height ; light green to medium green 
foliage scanty to medium in amount; the four small 
leaflets, and the moderate-sized, only slightly whitened 
stipules; the small creamy or greenish white flowers 
borne at and above the 7th or 8th node; and the short 
to medium length, round, plump, blunt-ended pods, are 
so like those of the Extra Earlies that the similarity 
has led to considerable duplication of synonyms between 
the two groups. Authorities on the pea, basing their 
decisions on the varieties in the field, and not knowing, 
or forgetting, differences in the color of the seeds, have 
occasionally pronounced Alaska or some other well- 
known variety in its group identical with other varieties 
in the Extra Early group, or vice versa. The two groups 
are alike in season, also, both very early. Sometimes 
one color of seed, sometimes the other gives the earliest 
marketable pods; but the peas of Alaska and its allies 
usually have more of the characteristic " pea " flavor, 
are sweeter, and perhaps more tender than those of 
similar cream-seeded types. The green-seeded smooth 
peas are almost always selected for canning, the cream 
seeded types, rarely. Neither type, except for mere 
earliness, is worth growing in private gardens. 

Whether the seeds of the Alaska group be called 
blue, as they generally are in England, or green, depends 
quite largely on the eye of the observer; but in some 
strains the seed coats separate more completely than 
in others from the underlying green cotyledons; and the 
intervening partial or complete layer of air " blues " 
or " whitens " the peas, just as in the cream-seeded 
types similar differences in the amount of separation 
lead to distinctly salmon-colored coats adhering quite 
closely to the orange-colored cotyledons, or to almost 
white peas where the layer of air shuts out the under- 
lying color. 



The modern types of Alaska show, also, considerable 
pitting, even wrinkling, of the seed coat, usually an 
index of better quality in the peas. This index is not 
always an accurate one, particularly in the case of 
crosses, as several canning peas, apparently well wrinkled, 
are little if any better in quality than the smoother 
Alaskas. 

History. The connection of Alaska with any of 
the old named types of peas is not so evident as that of 
Extra Early with Fulham peas, Hotspurs, Charlton 
and Early Frame. 

The " green Hastings " mentioned by Parkinson 
in 1629 seems to have been too tender to cold to have 
been the ancestor of our very hardy, smooth-skinned, 
green peas; and the " Rouncivals " too broad -podded 
and too tall. For more than a century and a half no 
other pea that could be the source of Alaska seems to 
be recorded. In 1778 Mawe-Abercrombie mentions 
" Green nonpariel " which name was later repeated 
as a synonym of Woodford Green Marrow; and the 
latter is undoubtedly in the line of descent of Alaska- 
type peas. Woodford Green Marrow was said to 
degenerate into Blue Prussian, " from which it evidently 
was derived;" but whether Blue Prussian was also an 
ancestor of the original Nonpareil and so a grandparent, 
many times removed, of Alaska, is unknown. We can 
find no record of the time of introduction of Blue Prus- 
sian into England from the Continent, which was 
undoubtedly its original home. The earliest references 
speak of it as an " old and popular variety " and it 
carried many synonyms; so it is quite probable that it 
came to England at a very early date; and selections 
from the dwarfer forms of it may well have been devel- 
oped into Nonpareil. If, however, Blue Prussian was 
not in England before Nonpareil originated, there must 
remain a missing link in the chain which connects 
Alaska with the early English peas; for the order could 
hardly be reversed, in spite of the apparent succession 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



39 



of recorded dates, and Blue Prussian be a descendant of 
Nonpareil. Giving Blue Prussian priority in date would 
lead to a chronological succession of leading varieties 
essentially as follows: Blue Prussian, Green Nonpareil, 
Blue Imperial, Woodford Green Marrow, Flack Imperial, 
Kentish Invicta, First Crop Blue. Earliest of All. Alaska, 
Earliest Blue, Rogers Winner, Rice No. 330, Horal, 
Hustler and Market Surprise(P). 

MAJOR VARIETIES OF ALASKA GROUP 

Blue Prussian. Refs. 3, 5; M'Mahon Amer. 
Gard. Cal. 311. 1806; Gard. Chron. 68, 198. 1850; 
Cor. Gard. 1:63. 1861; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:259. 
1885. Little is known of the early history of Blue 
Prussian, but the name indicates a Continental origin 
and its apparent relationship to some other varieties 
makes it probable that it was known in England long 
before any recorded dates for it. 

It still survives but is now used almost entirely as 
a field pea; and it is described here, with several allied 
varieties, under the Alaska group, because it holds a 
somewhat doubtful position as a progenitor of peas of 
that type. In the first half of the Nineteenth Century 
it was a prominent variety both in England and in 
America, where it was listed as early as 1806; and it 
has been grown to some extent in France. In its earlier 
days it was used by market gardeners as well as for field 
culture but has apparently never been a garden favorite. 

Older descriptions give it a slender, sometimes branched, 
not very robust stem, 2 3 4 to 3j^ feet high, with abundant dark 
green or " fresh " green foliage, the stipules being considerably 
whitened. Its medium-sized white flowers began about the 10th 
node, and produced a dozen or more pods, mostly in pairs, which 
were about 2 3 4 inches long, roundish or somewhat flattened, straight 
or slightly curved, with blunt to square ends when well filled, and 
containing 6 or 7 rather large, closely-packed, deep green peas of 
poor flavor. The seeds were small, whitish green or blue, round 
and almost smooth. It was late in season and very prolific. 

Prof. Goff's description of Blue Prussian as grown 
at this Station in 1884 differs very little from the older 
ones. 

Two strains of it, both from Idaho Station seed, were grown 
here recently, one strain being much superior to the other in vigor 
and productivity, tho quite similar in other respects. Character- 
istics of the better strain differed but little from those of the variety 
dating back 50 to 75 years; but the stems were not quite so tall 
(2 feet), pods not quite so long (2 to 2j^ inches), nor with so many 
peas (generally 51, the season somewhat earlier (75 days) and the 
crops hardly as good. 

Recent French descriptions make Blue Prussian quite dwarf 
and stocky, with short-jointed, zigzag stems, very much whitened 
stipules, and more pointed pods, rather poorly filled. 

In Canada, our Northwestern States, and in other 
scattered areas Blue Prussian is still one of the leading 
field peas. 

Nonpareil. Refs. 2, 4, 11, 12; Booth Car. 1810; 
Gard. Chron. 673. 1853; Va. Sta. Bui. 60:5. 1896; 
Tait Car. 1913; and letter from Tait, Dec. 14, 1922. 
Nonpareil has at least left its name in the Alaska group; 
and if Blue Prussian is not its parent and so ancestor 
of the later varieties of the group, that credit must be 
given to Nonpareil, from the name alone, with Aber- 
crombie's qualifying " green," for we have not a word 



of history or a description of the ancient variety. The 
name recurs in connection with Woodford Green Mar- 
row, which is undoubtedly in the line of descent of the 
Alaska peas, and in successive later references, Non- 
pareil was either name or synonym of varieties approach- 
ing nearer and nearer to what Alaska is today. These 
later Nonpareils are undoubtedly derived from Alaska 
or its immediate predecessors, rather than from the old 
Green Nonpareil, which has undoubtedly disappeared. 
They are recommended by the seedsmen who handle 
them as superior to Alaska in being earlier, longer podded 
and more productive. 

Two strains of Nonpareil, one called Extra Early, were grown 
in the Station garden for two seasons, in connection with these 
trials: and one strain for two years in the field beside Alaska, for 
testing as a canning pea. The small differences indicated greater 
productivity for Nonpareil over some strains of Alaska; slightly 
greater than the average of all the Alaska strains used, but not 
above the best one or two strains. Pod lengths also showed similar 
variations but not so great as between Alaska and Large-podded 
and Long-podded Alaska. The seeds were usually smaller, ranging 
from 165 to 185 to the ounce. 

The Nonpareils are now, therefore, merely good 
strains of the Alaska type. Pres. Jas. T. Moreland of 
Geo. Tait 85 Sons, Norfolk, Va., says their Nonpareil 
was a selection made about 1897 from an old pea " Vic- 
tor," which was itself selected from Laxton's Earliest 
of All, thus confirming the supposition that the modern 
Nonpareils are closely related to Alaska. 

Woodford Marrow. Refs. 4, 22-24, 26. By 
the careful selection necessary to prevent its degenera- 
tion into Blue Prussian, Woodford Marrow proves its 
origin in that variety. This was probably shortly 
before 1834. 

From the description given, it was 10 days later than the 
parent variety and differed from it only in the better (dark bluish) 
green color of foliage, pods, peas and seeds, the latter being deeper 
in color than those of any variety then known. The plants often 
bore medial branches, which Blue Prussian lacks, the pods were 
broader and the peas too thick skinned to be palatable except when 
very young. 

There seems, also, to have been a dwarf form a 
foot or so shorter than the type variety. 

Woodford Marrow was listed in several American 
catalogs before 1850; but soon disappeared from culti- 
vation, altho listed by Burr, 1863. 

Flack Imperial. Refs. 27-31. Introduced about 
1841 as Flack Victory, the name Imperial seems to 
have been more common for this variety. Like Wood- 
ford Marrow it is Blue Prussian in type, probably 
descending from it indirectly through Bedman Impe- 
rial, of which it was considered a great improvement. 

It soon ran back to Blue Prussian unless carefully selected. 
It was earlier, robust in growth, more dwarf, more productive, and 
with larger pods, peas and seeds than preceding varieties of the 
group. The stems are always branched, the foliage dark green 
but distinctly blotched grayish white. The seeds were large, irreg- 
ularly oval and dark blue. The earliest American references 
associate " Dwarf " with other names for the variety; but the 
reduction in height from English grown plants is probably due to 
changed climatic conditions. 

Burr included it in his book in 1863 but no later 
references have been found, and it was not carried long 



40 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



in England tho found in the Chiswick trials of 1860 to 
be the only Imperial " really worth growing." 

Kentish Invicta. Refe. 34 36; and Bliss Cat. 

Kentish Invicta. possibly the immediate ancestor 

of Alaska, was raised in 1867 by Eastes, a noted Kentish 

grower of peas, and speedily earned the reputation of 

being the earliest blue pea. It came to America about 

and was soon quite widely cataloged and well 

bated, if not extensively grown 

It .... .us at this Station, and descrilx .1 in 

lerable detail in 1884. From this description it could hardly 
be distinguished from the Alaskas of today but was apparent ly 
s imewbat taller, with rather lighter colored foliage, less uniform 
and prolific, and ripening more evenly. 

It is still cataloged in England and on the Continent, 
but superseded in America. 

Earliest of Ml. Refs. 40. 41; Jour. Hort. 2:132. 
1881; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 1:87. 1883. and ."$:255. 1885. 
Earliest of All was announced in 1881 by Laxton as a 
Ringleader x Little Gem cross. General distribution of 
it began the following year ; and seed of the variety was 
then offered in America It was tested at this Station 
in the same year and quite fully described in 1884. It 
was said to be somewhat lacking in vigor and not pro- 
lific; but in every other respect was identical with two 
strains bearing the name that were recently tested here 
for two years. One of these strains carried " Alaska " 
as a synonym, and the descriptive sheet for this strain 
bears check marks identical with those for a typical 
Alaska grown at the same time from seed furnished by 
one of our leading and most reliable growers of canning 
peas. It is very evident that Laxton*s Earliest of All 
furnished the seed, probably from selected, vigorous 
plants, on which stock later distributed as Alaska was 
based. The earliness of Laxton's pea is emphasized in 
English and Continental references of the time and 
later, with some hints of the lack of productiveness, 
was noted by Prof. Goff. Unfortunately we have no 
description of Alaska by Goff since he left the Station 
before the introduction of that variety. Other author- 
ities maintain the identity of the two varieties; but it 
seems almost certain that Cleveland's Alaska was a 
selection from Earliest of All rather than a renamed 
portion of the parent stock. As the two varieties are so 
intimately connected, the detailed description will be 
given under Alaska. 

Victor, an old pea listed by Tait, was a selection 
from Laxton's Earliest of All. 

Eclipse. Ref. 42. Eclipse was introduced by 
Harrison 2 in 1882, and named from a famous race- 
horse. If it differs from Laxton's Earliest of All, it is 
only in very unimportant characteristics, such as a 
peculiarly light green stem and rather scanty foliage. 
These differences, also, seem to have disappeared by 
cultivation in other places or other seasons; for later 
English and French references speak of its extreme 
likeness to, if not identity with, Earliest of All, Express 
and Alaska. 

As grown here from Idaho and British Columbia 
seed, it is a typical Alaska with a somewhat long stem. 



The name is also said by Laxton to be commonly applied 
to the blue, smooth-seeded strain of his Harbinger. 
The variety is quite distinct from Burbidge Eclipse, 
which had green, but dimpled seeds; and from the 
wrinkled, cream-seeded Eclipse. 

Uaska. Refs. 46 49; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. . r >:248. 
1887; also letter April 12, 1913, from W. W. Tracy, Supt. 
Testing Gardens, United States Department of Agri- 
culture. The Alaska pea, in pure stocks, in many 
selected or degenerating strains, or in other varieties 
sold under the name, probably is the pea most exten- 
sively grown in America. Cleveland claimed to have 
originated the variety about 1880 as a selection from 
Kentish Invicta, but similarity of Alaska to Laxton's 
Earliest of All in the hands of other seed growers and 
testers make it almost certain that the American variety 
came, probably after considerable selection, directly 
from Laxton's pea. 

The two varieties were grown under separate 
names for some time; but the widespread advertising of 
Alaska by Cleveland and by an agricultural periodical 
which distributed seed of the variety as a premium, 
made it so widely known that most growers of Earliest 
of All sold their stocks, at wholesale at least, as Alaska, 
though retaining both names either separately or as 
synonyms, in retail catalogs. The name Alaska was 
that of a steamship then holding the Transatlantic 
record. 

The united stocks remained very pure and very 
uniform for many years, but then, through lack of care- 
ful selection, the type began to split up and degenerate, 
so that today there are almost as many strains of Alaska 
as growers of seed peas; and each strain, unless very 
carefully selected and rogued, contains many divergent 
types in greater or less proportion. The situation is 
further complicated by the practice of making up 
shortages in America of true Alaska stocks by purchase 
of seed of similar varieties, usually from England, for 
which substitution Clipper, Earliest of All, First Crop 
Blue, Nonpareil, Earliest Blue, Eclipse, Express (from 
France), and possibly other varieties have been used. 

In tests of canning peas made here in 1924 and 1925, 
six strains of Alaska were grown side by side, which 
differed in productivity, in proportions of peas in different 
grades, and in computed financial returns, almost as 
much as though they had been distinct varieties. This 
makes it very difficult to give any description of the 
variety that would include only the better types of it, 
and would exclude poor types and similar kinds. 

As grown in the garden in comparison tests, in a 
rather dry season when vines and pods were not as 
large as usual, one strain of very uniform type was 
checked on the descriptive blanks to give the following 
description: 

The very dry seeds sown averaged about 150 to the ounce, 
the usual number being 130 to 140. They were uniform in size and 
shape, smooth but slightly pitted, round or occasionally indented, 
good light green in color, over green cotyledon color, with radicle 
showing plainly. Sown on April 27 or May 1, a picking of pods 
was ready in 55 days, or sown May 22 in 47 days, and other pickings 




Pods at top of plant 



HORAL 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




From imported seed; not acclimated 



IMPROVED TELEGRAPH 



(Two-thirds natural size 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



41 



could have been made for eight to twelve days, though practically 
all might have been secured within five days. The plants were 
1 , to 2'j feet high, stems slender, angular but smooth-sided or 
slightly ridged above; internodes short to medium in length, nodes 
not prominent; branches lacking or occasionally few at base or below 
medial; foliage abundant, medium green in color, with little or no 
whitish blotching, and with slight bloom; leaflets 2 to 4 in number, 
medium in size and shape, stipules only slightly longer, rounded at 
the tip and with a few teeth at the base; tendrils inconspicuous; 
flowers cream colored, usually borne singly, beginning at the 7th 
to 9th node on peduncles of medium length. The light green pods 
i short by dry seasons were from 2 to 2 :( | inches long, medium in 
width, quite plump, smooth, round in section, straight, not con- 
stricted, with blunt to square ends, having a straight tip. They 
contained from 5 to 7 peas and held their freshness moderately 
well. The green peas averaged about 1 10 to the ounce, were smooth, 
round, and light green to whitish green in color. They are of 
excellent canning quality for a starchy pea and hold color well in 
the can. 

Under favorable conditions Alaska yields well and 
gives peas that grade well for canning; but its great 
merit lies in its hardiness, permitting early sowing, 
and the earliness and promptness of ripening of the 
crop. These characteristics allow the grower to pre- 
pare the land and sow the seed before the other spring 
work presses, to get a cash return early in the season, 
and then devote the land to another crop. 

For garden and for market, the small pods and 
comparatively poor flavor of the peas are handicaps; 
though great quantities of Alaska type peas are grown 
for these purposes. 

\\ inner. Ref. Letter from Austin L. Rogers, of 
Rogers Seed Co., Dec. 30, 1926. This canners' pea, 
usually referred to as Rogers' Winner, originated from 
a few plants found in 1902 in a field of Alaska peas at 
Alpena, Mich. By selection for increased size and 
vigor of plants, an Alaska-type pea was developed 
with shorter pods and much smaller peas, which well 
met the demand, so widespread for a time, for a canners' 
pea that would grade high in No. Is. 

In our small canning crop tests in two seasons, 
Winner on 5 plats averaged at the rate of 2,983 lbs. of 
usable peas per acre, of which much larger percentages 
were of No. 1 and No. 2 grades than in the 2,648 lbs. 
of Alaska, the average yield based on 8 plats of that 
variety. Winner peas are pitted and indented, some- 
times almost wrinkled, but their quality is no better 
than that of Alaska, and the small size of the peas when 
fully developed tempts to a use of them in canning which 
injures the quality of No. 1 and No. 2 canned peas of 
this type. 

Rice No. 330. Refs. 64; and letters, Rice, Dec. 4, 
1924, and June 1, 1926. Rice No. 330 came, originally, 
from plants found in a field of peas sold as Canada 
Yellow Field but really a French canning pea for 
some years grown in eastern Michigan, much earlier 
than the ordinary Canadas, with seeds more even in 
size, much smaller, and of better quality. Among 
these plants, grown in the test plat as Row 330, Mr. 
Wilber Brotherton found, about 1905, a single plant, 
with Alaska-like characteristics, from which, after 
much selection to get rid of cream seeds, etc., the present 
Rice No. 330 was developed. From the character- 



istics and behavior of the progeny of the plant it was 
evidently the result of a field cross between the field 
peas and a blue-seeded variety, possibly Alaska. 

Rice No. 330, tho very similar to Alaska, is con- 
sidered superior to it in disease resistance, and per- 
centage of small peas when ready for canning. In our 
canning pea tests it was decidedly later than Alaska, 
outyielded it by one-tenth, and gave decidedly better 
percentages of the two smaller sizes of peas. 

Hustler, improperly listed as " Hustlers " in 
Bulletin No. 532 of this Station, is distinct from " The 
Hustlers " (p. 90). It is one of the peas developed, 
for canning, at the Ashland branch of the Wisconsin 
Agricultural Experiment Station. According to a letter 
from Prof. E. J. Delwiche of that Station, Hustler was 
selected from a cross between Nott Excelsior and Hors- 
ford Market Garden, the selection being followed up 
for the pitted, smooth-seeded type and early maturing 
habit. " The seed closely resembles Alaska in size, 
color and shape. In season it is just as early as the 
earliest strains of that variety. Hustler, as canning 
tests have shown, is higher in quality than other peas 
of the Alaska group." 

In our canning crop tests, the Wisconsin Hustler 
did not grade quite as well as the average for Alaska; 
but gave a slightly larger gross yield. 

Horal. Ref. 70. The Horal pea was developed 
at the Ashland branch of the Wisconsin Station from 
crosses between Horsford Market Garden and Alaska 
made in 1901, single plant selections being made for 
five years until the Horal type was established. This 
work was in charge of Prof. E. J. Delwiche. 

Horal differs from Alaska in almost all characters; 
but is a canners' pea only, and as it corresponds closer 
to Alaska in canning quality than to the other parent, 
it is placed here. 

It is two weeks later than Alaska, only three- 
fourths as tall, stocky stemmed, with very dark green 
foliage having small leaflets in 6s, with longer, paired 
pods borne at the top of the plants, beginning at about 
the 14th of the very short joints. The pods contain 
more and much smaller peas than those of Alaska, 
second in size to Rogers Winner, and smaller than 
those of some strains of that variety. It grades as well 
or better than Winner and in our tests was decidedly 
more productive. Were the quality what the green 
color of the peas and the decidedly wrinkled surface 
of the seeds would indicate, Horal would be a surpassing 
variety; but the quality from the can is little, if any, 
better than that of Alaska. 

Resistance to root -rot to a remarkable degree is 
said to characterize Horal; and it has been found here 
to be quite resistant to one of the leaf-spot fungi, and 
fairly resistant to the other. 

Market Surprise. Ref. 75; Jour. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. 39:689. 1913. Market Surprise hardly belongs 
in the Alaska group, since the seeds are mingled cream 
and green as to the outer coat, with orange and green 
under color, respectively. The pods are also very 
slightly curved and pointed at the end, not blunt or 



42 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



square; but in other characteristics it is so close to 
Alaska that it stems best placed here. 

It was introduced about 1910 or 1911 by Hurst 
and came to America very soon thereafter. The plants, 
as described in the above and other references and as 
grown here for three seasons, are slightly taller than 
those of Alaska, often branched from the base, bear 



pods of fine green color, sometimes in pairs, which are 
slightly longer than the average for Alaska, largely due 
to the pointed tip, but are not ready for picking quite 
as soon. The peas and seeds are but little larger than 
those of Alaska, and the seeds are usually smooth, but 
occasionally somewhat dimpled. 



SCIMITAR GROUP 



This group of smooth-seeded peas includes both 
cream and green types, and some varieties in which 
the seeds are mixed in color; tho this mixed color is 
far less frequent in smooth seeded types than in dimpled 
and wrinkled groups. 

The distinguishing characteristic of the group is 
the long, slender, curving pods, shown by the well- 
known Petit Pois or French Canner peas, and repre- 
sented in the wrinkled peas by varieties like Senator, 
Lincoln, and Rice No. 13. 

The type is an old one, in England dating back to 
Sickle, listed in the Fuller. Tracy, Blackwell catalog of 
1688. Peas of this type are much more popular in 
France and elsewhere on the continent than in England 
and America; and it is probable that the history could 
be traced much further back if the pea literature of 
continental Europe were studied. 

Several varieties of this type have been grown at 
the Station from French and German seed; but as there 
is no likelihood that such varieties will ever become 
popular here, these are not described. A few varieties 
included in the group do not, strictly, belong in it, 
the pods being too little curved ; but these are not numer- 
ous enough to warrant separate grouping. Other 
varieties, also, are of this type and were once considered 
garden peas: but are of such poor quality or so viny 
that they are now grown, if at all, under field culture. 

MAJOR VARIETIES IN SCIMITAR GROUP 
CREAM SEEDED SECTION 

While Sickle. Refs. 1,2. White Sickle is prob- 
ably the same as Sickle, listed a century and a half 
before it, but we lack any description of the old variety. 
White Sickle was said to be 3 to 4 feet tall, prolific, late, 
with pods rather shorter and more bent than those of 
Scimitar, rather larger and similar in color to those of 
White Prussian. No record was found of this pea in 
America. 

kuvergne. Refs. 7 20. This old French pea 
was sent to England in 1833 or 1834 by M. de Vilmorin 
of Paris, and may have originated with him a year or 
two previously, as it was fully described in 1832, presum- 
ably as new, in a French gardening annual. Unlike 
most smooth -seeded peas, it found favor in England 
and spread widely, under various names, as the peas, 
especially when picked early, are small, delicate and of 
very good flavor. As thus picked, or as sifted from 
this and similar varieties to remove the larger, harder 
peas, canned peas of this type, " Petit Pois," " French 
Canners." " French Sifted " or " Delicatesse," command 



fancy prices both in France and in America. Peas of 
this kind first came to America under the name Scimitar, 
variously spelled, but have been better known by other 
names. 

They were grown at this Statior. in 1884 under the 
old name, Auvergne, and in our recent tests both as 
Scimitar and as Petit Pois. The Scimitar seeds, 
however, from British Columbia, did not give a satis- 
factory test, little information being secured except the 
time of maturing, midseason. Good data were secured 
later, however, from Giant White Scimitar grown 
from seed sent from McMillan, Mich. The plants 
grown in 1884, those of Petit Pois, and those of Giant 
White Scimitar differed very little, nor was the season 
changed; but there has been a decided improvement 
in the type in the direction of better pods, those of Petit 
Pois being longer than those of Auvergne and of Giant 
White Scimitar than of Petit Pois. 

Height 3 to 3 3 t feet; stems stout, rarely branched; foliage 
abundant, medium green, not whitened and with little bloom, 
consisting of 4 or 5, occasionally 6, large leaflets, and slightly to 
much larger stipules, with large, sharp teeth half way to the tip; 
flowers large, begin about the 13th node, and except in the Petit 
Pois, not paired; longest in Petit Pois; pod stalks longer than flower 
stalks. Pods medium green in color, from 2 to 3 ' ■> inches long 
with Auvergne, 3 to 3 J 2 with Petit Pois and 3} 2 to 4'| inches 
with Giant Scimitar, medium to narrow, slender, plump, much 
curved, pointed or rounded at the ends, with small tips, and filled 
to the edges but not to the ends with from 5 to 8 round, smooth, 
medium green peas; seeds of medium size, very smooth. All 
varieties were ready in midseason or slightly past it; none gave 
better than good crops. 

It is probably that Giant White Scimitar is Vil- 
morin's Long-podded Improved Scimitar. Serpette 
Ameliore, as grown at the Station from French seed, 
not Vilmorin's, was smaller-podded, with better filled 
pods and more prolific than Giant White Scimitar. 

Karlv Somerset 1 Ref. 35) was introduced before 
1919 by Kelway and seed of it came to us from the 
Idaho Station in 1922. 

It was dwarf. 1 Vi 1 ' 1 feet much taller in England , unbranched, 
with medium to abundant, medium to dark yellowish green foliage. 
with small, broad leaflets and very much larger stipules, little 
whitened. The pods were borne singly 1 paired under best con- 
ditions! from about the 7th node, and were straight or slightly 
curved, blunt-pointed, rarely 3 inches long, but very plump, very 
pale green in color, and well filled with 4-5 '6-8 in England 1 
moderately large, fairly well -colored peas. The pods soon lost 
color. It was among the earliest of the curved-podded, smooth 
seeded peas, and yielded fairly well. 

GREEN SEEDED SECTION 
Blue Scimitar. Refs. 3 6; Hovey Cat. 1859. 
Blue Scimitar was first described, with White Sickle. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



43 



in 1834. A later reference says it doubtless originated 
from Blue Prussian and returns to it on poor soil. It 
evidently became much more widely spread than its 
companion, and reached America in 1859, where it was 
considered " very fine and productive." 

English descriptions make it 2 ' 2 to 3 feet tall ; stem simple or 
occasionally branched; foliage dark green, whitened, pods 12 to 
18, usually in pairs, dark green in color, much curved from base to 
tip, flattened; peas 9-10, of better quality than those of Blue 
Prussian; seeds irregularly oval and light or dark blue in color. 
It was later than White Sickle and matured over a long season, 
making it a favorite of market gardeners. 

Laxton Supreme. Refs. 25, 26; Hovey Cat. 
1869; Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 12:35. 1890. Supreme 
was one of Laxton's first seedling peas, and for many 
years after 1867 was said to be the result of a cross 
between Prolific Long-pod and Little Gem; but in 1890 
Laxton gave the parentage as Advancer by Prizetaker, 
a more probable origin when the plant characters are 
considered. The variety was introduced in 1868 by 
Carter and reached both France and America in the 
following year, and Germany very soon. It was grown 
at the Station in 1884 under its own name, and in 1885, 
from seeds sent from France under the name Green 
Auvergne, the identity of the two escaping notice, but 
the descriptions (partly from manuscript notes) vary 
in no essential details 

This Supreme and one later put out by Sutton, 
grown here in recent tests, are quite unlike. 

Laxton Supreme was very much like the old Auvergne but 
with taller, stronger stems, shorter jointed and more branched, and 
with larger, more whitened leaflets and stipules; pods began slightly 
lower on the stem, about the 11th or 12th node, were more often 
paired, rather shorter and less curved, broader and decidedly more 
plump, often being thicker than wide, and saddle-backed. They 
were beautiful pods, very well filled with 6-8 roundish, often com- 
pressed peas. The seeds were indented or slightly wrinkled, rather 
dull green, tinted cream or bluish white. The crops were quite 
good, but late, maturing gradually. 

Carter Hundredfold. Refs. 28; Jour. Hort. 
13:83. 1870; Bliss Cat. 1873; Hogg Gard. Yr. 
Book 14:145. 1873. This pea, entirely distinct 
from Sutton Hundredfold, was first noticed in 1869, 
and was advertised the next year by Carter. Some 
early references credit it to Thos. Laxton, and call it 



a cross between Laxton Prolific Long-pod and Ne Plus 
Ultra; others say it was in a collection of seedling peas 
grown by Carter from crosses of Laxton's peas, and 
ascribe to it the same parentage; but Laxton himself 
said it was not originated by him, nor did he believe 
the parentage given correct, as his Prolific Long-pod 
had not, in 1869, been introduced long enough for it 
to be the parent of a variety with any considerable 
amount of seed stock. It was mentioned in an American 
periodical in 1870 and listed by Bliss in 1873, but appar- 
ently little grown here. It did not disappear from 
English lists until after 1900, but was never widely 
grown. It was included in recent U. S. Department of 
Agriculture tests. 

It was a tall, late variety, prolific, with long, curved, deep 
green pods, having long-rounded ends; notable for the fine color 
of the peas which was retained after cooking. For this reason it 
received its synonym " Cook's Favorite." It was often compared 
with Carter Supreme; but its seeds were smooth and olive green 
in color, those of Supreme, wrinkled and mixed cream and green; 
and its pods rather wider and more curved. 

Hogg says this is the same as Prizetaker, and his 
figure of the pod of Prizetaker corresponds to the above 
description. Prizetaker is discussed in the Dimpled- 
seeded group. 

SABRE SECTION 

Sabre. Refs. 37; Gard. Mo. 19:242. 1877. 
Two Sabre peas were grown at the Station, White in 
1884 and Green in 1886, both from German seed, but 
neither variety has found favor either in the United 
States or England, tho said in 1877 to be most highly 
esteemed for earliness and productivity of all peas grown 
by market gardeners near Paris. In 1920 it was by no 
means so popular there. Sabre was also grown here 
in 1926 from seed produced at McMillan, Mich. It has 
apparently not changed in 40 years. 

Height from 2 ! 2 to 4 feet, according to season : stems rather 
stout, rarely branched; foliage medium green, slightly whitened; pods 
from about the 13th node, rarely paired, light green in color, moder- 
ately broad, very plump, and strongly curved forward from base to 
the rounded end; peas 5 to 9, averaging 7 in the last test, roundish 
or long oval, often compressed; dry seeds of medium size, and cream 
or green in color according to the strain. It was fairly productive, 
with pods ready in midseason. 



DIMPLED-SEEDED GROUP 



The varieties of peas included in our Dimpled- 
seeded group are united by only one characteristic, a 
similarity in seed surface and shape; and often differ 
considerably even in that one. In other respects they 
make a decidedly heterogeneous collection, including 
sub-groups quite dissimilar in plant, foliage and pod 
characters. The pods are usually large, making many 
varieties in the group very attractive market -gardeners' 
peas; and the quality is generally much better than that 
of the smooth peas. Indeed some of the recent additions 
to the group compare quite favorably with wrinkled 
peas; and the hardiness of the seeds permits early sowing 
and gives comparatively early crops altho the actual 
time required for growth ranks most of the varieties 
as second early or later. In markets where the supply 



is largely local, these " dimpled " peas fill a distinct and 
useful place. Too often, however, they are sold for 
Gradus, Telephone or peas of even better quality. 

Distinguishing characteristics. — The basis upon 
which the group rests is, primarily, the surface appear- 
ance of the ripe, dry peas; and, secondarily, the general 
shape of these seeds. 

No variety has been placed in the group if the seeds 
are nearly round and the seed coat smooth or merely 
marked with small deep pits like those on a thimble, 
such as characterize many of the better Alaska types; 
nor, on the other hand, if, though oval or angular in 
shape, they are nearly covered by a network of fine 
folds and ridges. The depressions of the surface which 
characterize dimpled peas are quite shallow and wide, 



44 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



distinctly separated by areas of smooth surface, these 
surface depressions usually covering somewhat similar 
indentations of the cotyledons — dimples rather than 
pits. 

On the other hand, if the seeds are compressed 
from the round shape into one more or less square, 
oblong, oval, or cylindrical, even if the surface is hardly 
more than pitted, it has been thought best to include 
the variety in this group, altho it probably represents 
only a transition stage between the true round-seeded 
peas and the varieties more characteristic of the 
" dimpled " group. Many of the older varieties included 
here, those originating before or in the second quarter 
of the last century, have seeds approaching the round- 
ness and smoothness of the Alaska, Tom Thumb, White 
Marrowfat and Extra Early types; and should, probably, 
be considered as forming a sub-group; as the large, rather 
irregular -shaped seeds are pitted and slightly wrinkled, 
rather than dimpled; but the seeds pass so gradually 
from the type of the sub-group to that of the true dimpled 
peas that it would be impossible to fix limits for a sub- 
group. At the other extreme in the group are many 
varieties, often classed by some authorities as wrinkled 
peas, in which the dimpling is subordinated to an 
apparent wrinkling of the seed coat. These " dimpled- 
wrinkled " peas, however, usually carry, also, the thick, 
tough skins of the larger round peas, like the American 
Marrowfats, and of the oval, oblong or angular char- 
acteristically dimpled seeds. Such peas, though they 
would be called wrinkled on casual inspection, differ so 
markedly, in skin texture and in coarseness of wrinkling, 
from the seeds of the " Sweet-wrinkled " types with 
thin, tender skins and more delicate, finer creasing and 
ridging of the seed coat, that they must be placed in this 
group rather than in any of the wrinkled pea groups. 

It should be remembered, also, that the basal 
characters of peas in the semi -smooth -seeded group vary 
widely under different conditions. Not only does the 
same variety behave differently in different localities 
on different soils and in different seasons, but the crop 
seed may differ markedly from the seed sown. In one 
season of much and well -distributed rainfall during our 
Station pea trials, nearly all of the typically dimpled- 
seeded peas sown gave crop seeds that approached very 
closely to wrinkled peas, with a marked increase in 
green pigment. Pure cream seeds sown gave crops of 
quite evenly divided cream and green seeds; and the 
heterozygous, cream and green-seeded varieties gave 
crops of all green seeds. 

It is very fortunate that Mendel's pea experiments 
were confined to restricted areas, and probably quite 
uniform seasonal conditions; for if he had been faced 
by such changes as were shown by parent and uncrossed 
progeny in the season of 1922 at this Station, he might 
have had good reason to doubt the fundamental quality 
of some of his pea characters. It should also be said 
that, in this particular season, similar changes in sur- 
face and color of the seed coats were shown in many 
other peas than those in this group. In practically all 
cases increased roughness of seed coats and more or 



darker green pigmentation were found in the harvested 
seeds than in those sown. 

The group, because of these diversities, allows no 
summation of characteristics such as was possible with 
the Extra Earlies, Tom Thumbs and Alaskas; nor can 
any strict chronological or genet ical history of it be 
given. It does not trace back, except in very small 
part, to ancestors mentioned by early writers on the pea; 
but is made up of smaller groups of different and usually 
quite recent origin, the earliest of the most typical 
varieties dating about the middle of the last century. 
The sub-groups, not adaptable to strict limitation, 
appear to have originated in quite diverse, even opposed 
methods. Some arise from the development of smooth 
peas into larger-seeded types in which crowding in the 
pod induced denting of the peas; others from rever- 
sion to a smoother seed coat of some of the larger peas 
resulting from Knight's segregation of wrinkled-seeded 
types, or from similar behavior of later wrinkled peas 
under varying conditions or through crossing; still 
others from accentuation of the tendency to dimpling 
found in some af the American Marrowfats; and prob- 
ably, in a few cases, from true sporting in other types. 

The group permits of division into a cream-seeded 
section and one in which the seeds are mixed cream 
and green, olive-green, bluish green, or light to medium 
green. In very few cases do the ripe seeds show as dark 
green as characterizes some other sections of peas. The 
division between the two sections is not a definite or 
positive one; for as explained previously, these dimpled- 
seeded varieties are more subject than any other type 
to variations in roughness of seed coat and depth of 
pigmentation. 

MAJOR VARIETIES OF DIMPLED SEEDED 

GROUP 

WHITE OR CREAM-SEEDED 

Dickson Favorite. Refs. 32; Burr Fid. Gard. 
Veg. 531. 1863; U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. (Agr.) 1865. 
Dickson Favorite, introduced in 1854 by Dickson (1), 
was then considered a form of Auvergne, but the deep 
pitting, indenting and occasional dimpling of the peas 
would seem to place the variety in this group, notwith- 
standing the small size of the seeds, especially as the 
pods, as now grown, show little curving and are too 
broad for the Scimitar type. 

As grown here it was l}^ to l?.i feet tall, slender-stemmed, 
unbranched, with light green foliage, considerably whitened, and 
with sharp-tipped stipules; the single and paired pods were borne 
from the 7th node up, were 2 to 2|<j inches long, plump, square- 
ended with distinct tip and well-filled with 5 to 7 medium-sized, 
oval, slightly indented, medium green peas. It was an early, mid- 
season variety, and only a fair bearer. 

Harrison Perfection! Refs. 33; Cor. Gard. 
2.">:1861; Country Gent. 17:143. 1861. This, first 
of the white-seeded, truly semi-smooth, or dimpled 
peas, originated with Harrison (I) about 1855; and 
reached America about 1861. It was a typical member 
of the group, though less well known than Harrison 
Glory, of the green-seeded class. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



45 



The plants are robust in growth, with a thick, succulent stem 3 
to 3 ] 2 feet high, carrying dark-green foliage and bearing 16 to 18 
pods to the plant. Contrary to first hopes, the variety was a dis- 
appointment, as the large, handsome pods fill very slowly and poorly, 
are deceptive at first and unsatisfactory when ready. The 5 or 
6 large peas are of fair quality but not as sweet as those of Harrison 
Glory, and in neither variety are they as good as true wrinkled 
peas like Advancer, which they resemble in habit. Harrison Per- 
fection is a second early, more than a week later than the extra 
earlies of its time. 

(»lor\ Refs. 40, 41 seems to have followed Har- 
rison Perfection very closely in time; and was adver- 
tised by Thomas Wild, of Ipswich, as Gilson's Glory. 
It is not Harrison's Glory, which is green-seeded. 

It is a slenderer, shorter-vined type ( 2 '4 -3 feet 1 than Harrison's 
Perfection, with pods fully as long, 3'j to 4 inches, narrower and 
less plump, with rounded to blunt ends and very small tips: peas 
5 or 6. of medium size and dark green color; seeds oblong, or almost 
square, slightly dimpled, grayish cream. 

It was, when introduced, later than Harrison Per- 
fection; but as grown here it was not later than mid- 
season : and gave a very good crop. 

Prolific Long-pod. Refs. 50 53; Roy. Hort. 
Soc. Jour. 12:35. 1891. Thomas Laxton, one of 
England's most famous pea-breeders, secured this pea 
in 1858 from a Sangster No. 1 x Prizetaker cross, and 
it was introduced in 1865 by Carter. It reached Amer- 
ica about 1868, was quite extensively grown for at least 
twenty years, but is no longer listed. The name was 
also applied, incorrectly, to a green-seeded pea, an 
inferior stock of Prizetaker. 

The true variety was tall-vined, 5 to 7 feet, robust, vigorous, 
with large, pale-green, whitened foliage; pods slightly curved at 
the tips, large, 3 to 3j^ inches long at this Station in 1884, broad 
and heavy, 12 to 14 to the vine; with often 9 or more peas to the 
pod, of good quality but not equal to the true wrinkled types. 

It seems to have been a splendid second-early pea 
for market gardeners. 

William the First (Refs. 54, 55) originated from 
a cross between Little Gem and Prizetaker, or between 
Little Gem and Laxton Prolific, made by Laxton, late 
in the '60s, and was introduced by Hurst. It received 
a First Class Certificate from the Royal Horticultural 
Society in 1872, was listed in America in that year and 
was grown at the Station in 1884, but probably never 
widely distributed here. 

The vines are of the Extra Early type, tall, slender, unbranched, 
light green in color, with 4 leaflets, and large, whitened stipules; 
but the pods, and particularly the peas, place the variety in the 
" dimpled " group. The pods are borne from the 9th node up, 
on long, slender but rigid, sometimes leafy, stalks, are 3j'2 inches 
long, broad, plump, round-pointed with very small tips, light green 
in color, quite rough toward maturity, and contain 7 or 8 large, 
compressed, ovate or almost wedge-shaped pale green peas. 1 

In early descriptions the pods are said to be dark bluish green 
in color, with heavy bloom and seeds light bluish cream or mixed, 
and indented; but seeds received here from the University of British 
Columbia were bright cream in color, large, oval, and typically 
dimpled. They are evidently variant in seed coat characters as 
are those of so many of the group. The variety matures very 
early and gives good crops. 



Several improved strains of William the First have 
been introduced at various times, one dating about 1887 
being called William the Conqueror ( Ref. 56 1. 

Sunrise. Refs. 73 75; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:254. 
1885. The Messrs. Day, of England, originated this 
pea before 1880, during which year and the following 
one it was distributed by several English seedsmen, 
and by at least one in America. It was tried out at 
this Station in 1884, and again within the past five 
years from seed sent by the Idaho Station and the 
University of British Columbia, from the latter under 
the name Early Sunrise. The two strains differed 
slightly, not in season, but mainly in greater vigor, 
more luxuriant foliage, slightly larger pods and dis- 
tinctly larger peas in the one from British Columbia; 
tendencies that marked practically all varieties received 
from that region where peas grow about as well, and as 
large, as in England. 

This British Columbia strain differed very little from the variety 
as grown here by Goff. It gave vigorous plants from 2 to 3 feet 
tall, sometimes branched at the base; with stems stout, internodes 
short; foliage abundant, deep green, scarcely whitened and with 
little bloom, flowers about the 11th node; pods usually single 
(paired in early test), 2% to 3} i inches long, rather broad, straight, 
with rounded to blunt ends and small tips, poorly filled; peas 4 to 6, 
medium to large, oblong or oval, light green; seeds oblong, indented, 
cream -colored, weighing about 75 or 80 to the ounce. Only fair 
crops were secured, but these were ready somewhat earlier than 
in the older trials, when the variety was recorded as rather late and 
maturing its crop rather gradually. It is probable that growth in 
a warmer, drier season than that of British Columbia accounted for 
the earlier maturity. 

References to the use of this pea in the South by 
market gardeners are favorable. 

Pilot. Refs. 106-110, 152; Burpee Cat. 1910. 
Altho there are some discrepancies in references, Pilot 
apparently originated with Dickson ( 2 ) previous to 
1903 when the pea was given an Award of Merit by 
the Royal Horticultural Society Hurst & Co., and 
Watkins & Simpson, are also credited with the intro- 
duction of peas bearing this name, or similar ones, like 
Primo Pilot, Primo, and Premo, which, however, are 
probably strains or improvements of the original 
" Hawlmark " Pilot. In one place Pilot is said to be 
a selection from Gradus and in another the result of a 
cross between this pea and Early William. It was 
brought to America in 1910, and is now quite generally 
listed. Pilot seed was secured from two firms and that 
of Primo Pilot, Improved Pilot, and Premo, each from 
one source, and all grown here for two or more seasons 
during the past five years. Slight, but not constant 
nor consistent, differences were shown between the 
different strains; but these were not greater nor greatly 
different from the variations in descriptions of Pilot 
grown at different times or different places in England. 
Primo Pilot, all things considered, seems a rather superior 
strain. 

Height varying. 2 to 3 feet; stems slender to moderately 
stout; internodes rather long, nearly always branched at the base 



1 This description was made at McMillan. Mich., in the test plats of the United States Department of Agriculture, as the descriptions 
made from the Station plants were incomplete. 



46 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



and always above, medium green foliage, moderately abundant, 
slightly whitened and without much bloom, consisting of noo 
characteristic leaflets in fours and stipules only slightly larger, 
with blunt to rounded tips, sharply toothed below and shallowly 
abo\ i I* ~th or 8th node, usually single on moderately 

long, slender stalks nearly 4 inches in length. 

broad, quite pi . ht. with i rounded, tipless 

ends, medium grevn, usually not very well filled: peas usually A to 
6. la: indented, or oval, medium green, seeds typically 

dimpled. * I val in shape, bright cream in color, with some 

green, the amount of green and the degree of wrinkling varying 
decidedly according to strain and season. Seeds of the later intro- 
duced and improved strains showed more of the green pigmentation. 

The Station crops were not large, but were ready 
for picking in 60 days or less from rather late plantings. 
The comparative earliness and large size of the pods 
making Pilot a very good pea for market. 

Manner's Early Market and Hartner's Miracle 
are apparently local names for Pilot or Pilot strains. 

I ighl Weeks. Refs. Ill, 112. Carter introduced 
this pea about 1903, claiming for it the good points 
of its parents, American Wonder and William the 
First. 

It is the dwarfest of the group, growing only about 1 foot 
high on the Station grounds, but producing a very good crop of pods 
similar to those of Pilot but averaging slightly shorter, not quite 
as broad, occasionally slightly curved, and of better color. The 
pointed ends, due to undeveloped peas, detract somewhat from 
the attractiveness of the pods. Plants small, stocky, with few 
basal branches; the 4 to 6 large peas of good color and fair quality; 
and the ripe seeds are slightly smaller than those of Pilot, 
105 to 120 to the ounce, and less dimpled, otherwise similar. Some 
pods were ready for picking in from 50 to 60 days, the time varying 
with time of planting and season. Eight Weeks, Early Eight 
Weeks and Extra Early Eight Weeks were names under which 
different lots of seed were received: all were alike in season, and 
bear heavily, so that good crops can be secured from comparatively 
small areas. 

Kelwaj Beauty. Refs. 138: Randall-McLaughlin 
Cat. 1920. Kelway Beauty appears as a " novelty " 
in the 1919 catalog of the firm, but as it was listed in 
America in 1920, it probably originated considerably 
earlier. 

As tested at the Station for three seasons, it is of dwarf type, 
2 feet; stems moderately stout, semi-erect, unbranched; foliage 
moderate in amount, dark green but whitened, consisting of small, 
rather long leaflets in 6s and slightly larger, round-tipped stipules; 
flowers often paired, begin at the 6th or 7th node: pods typical 
of the group, usually single, on long, thick stalks, nearly 4 inches 
long, broad, pointed at the end, decidedly light in color and poorly 
filled; peas averaging only 4 to the pod. large, long oval or oblong and 
deep green in color: seeds medium-sized, cream-colored, varying as 
do others of the group. The pods are ready in midseason, and the 
crops have been only fair. 

Isbell Beauty, introduced by S. M. Isbell Co., 
Jackson, Mich., is an early selection from Kelway 
Beauty but is classed as a Wrinkled cream-seeded 
pea. 

Radio Refs. 137. 138 was new to America in 
1924. Tho listed by Maule as his, no definite statement 
was made as to originator, date of origin, or parentage; 
but a letter from this firm, Apr. 15. 1926. says it came 
from England and was named and introduced by Maule. 
Charlton's Radio, as seeds were labeled when received 
from the test plats of the U. S. Department of Agriculture 



at McMillan, Mich., was grown here in 1926, and tho 
considerably taller, appears identical in other respects 
with Radio from Maule and another American firm. 
Charlton lists Radio, apparently not new, in the catalog 
of 1924. All three differ slightly in color and roughness 
of seed coat. 

GREEN SEEDED SECTION 

It is now impossible to separate satisfactorily, either 
from each other or from several varieties of wrinkled 
peas, some ten or more varieties of this section of the 
dimpled -seeded group which originated before, or shortly 
after, the middle of the last century. Interlocking 
synonyms, incorrect assignment of synonyms, duplica- 
tion of names and synonyms, variations in stated dates 
of origin, and scanty or imperfect descriptions form an 
impenetrable maze. Fortunately, few of these varieties 
are important in American pea history, but some dis- 
cussion of them is necessary as a foundation for the 
group. These are generally relegated to the subsec- 
tion of minor varieties. 

Groom Superb. Refs. 8-12; Sinclair Cat. 1839; 
Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 526. 1863. This pea was 
described in 1834 as only 1 ' ■> to 2 feet tall, with 2 ' L >-inch, 
compact, blunt -ended pods and large peas, the seeds 
being white and light green. It was even later than 
Early Green Marrow. Later it was said to have origi- 
nated with Groom, who sent out seeds of it in 1831. It 
was considered a distinct dwarf variety of Blue Prussian, 
with very large and probably indented peas. It was 
very productive and the peas thought of excellent quality 
when first introduced, but by 1861 " much surpassed 
by others." 

It was listed in America in 1839, and described by 
Burr in 1863, who found it decreasing in popularity tho 
still grown because of its dwarfness and profuseness. 

Burbidge Eclipse. Refs. 24; Jour. Hort. 18:401. 
1872. This pea was long grown near Canterbury, 
Eng., where it was known as Stubbs' Dwarf, from the 
grower, but nearly 30 years later, about 1849, was intro- 
duced to commerce by a nurseryman at Buckland, near 
Dover, who gave it his name, Burbidge, combined with 
that of a famous racehorse. It was introduced into 
America almost at once, and continued to be listed 
here until 1889, at least. Probably Stubbs' Blue 
Marrow is the same as Stubbs' Dwarf and Burbidge 
Eclipse. 

It was very dwarf, under 2 feet, unbranched, with dark 
green but blotched foliage, matured quite early, was prolific and 
bore long, broad, plump, paired pods containing 5 6 large peas of 
good quality. The seeds were bluish olive green and slightly 
indented. 

Prizetaker. Refs. 27-31: Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 
11:83. 1873. Prizetaker, perhaps better known as 
Beck Prizetaker, and Prizetaker Green Marrow, was 
one of the most widely grown and most popular peas in 
England, being pronounced best of 60 varieties grown 
on Sutton's trial grounds in 1860; was well known in 
America and was cultivated to some extent in France. 

It was said to be a selection from Bellamy Early 
Green Marrow, made or developed by Beck, whose name 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



47 



is also connected with Beck Gem, progenitor of Tom 
Thumb. It was probably first advertised in 1854, tho 
grown prior to 1850, and was tested by the Royal 
Horticultural Society in 1859-60, again in 1867 and 
again in 1901. It came to America shortly after 1860 
and was tested at this Station in 1884, and in Maine 
in 1888. but does not seem to have been included in 
Bailey's list of 1889. 

As grown here by Prof. Goff, it was a very prolific midseason 
variety of medium height, 3 to 5 feet; stem rather slender; foliage 
abundant, dark green washed with white and slightly glaucous; 
leaflets and stipules rather large: only moderately plump, slightly 
curved, rounded or blunt at the end when well filled; peas 5-8 
i sometimes as many as 11), large, compressed, pale green; seeds 
dull yellowish green or cream, roundish, indented, or irregular in 
shape. 

Harrison Glory. Ref. 33. This, perhaps first of 
the true dimpled peas with green seeds, originated 
with Harrison 1 1 ) before 1855 when it was advertised 
by Sutton. Except for the color of its seeds it was 
considered identical with Harrison Perfection. As the 
latter was not grown at the Station this similarity can- 
not be confirmed ; so it is thought best to give a somewhat 
detailed description of this green-seeded variety. It 
came to America about 1861, was listed by Bailey in 
1889 and was still grown in Canada as a field pea in 
1901. It was grown here for three seasons, first from 
seed sent us by the Idaho Station and later from har- 
vested seed. 

It was comparatively short- vined, 2 to 2}-2 feet, erect, to droop- 
ing, hardly needing support; stem quite stout, with very short inter- 
nodes and no branches; foliage abundant to dense, dark green, 
decidedly whitened and quite glaucous; leaflets varying from 4 to 6, 
of medium size and rather long; stipules much larger than the leaf- 
lets, clasping the stem deeply, with rounded tips and teeth about 
one-third of the way up the margin; tendrils quite conspicuous, 
stocky, much curled: flowers begin at the 14th node, generally paired, 
on moderately long, stocky stalks; pods from 2J4 to 3}o inches 
long, quite broad, moderately to very plump, oval in cross section 
slightly curved, usually filled to the edge, but not to the end, which 
is rounded to blunt, or even square when specially well filled, of good 
color, only slightly lighter than the foliage; peas 4, 5 or, rarely, more, 
large, oblong, flattened, medium-green; seeds medium or above in 
size, about 100 to the ounce, square or flattened in shape, semi- 
smooth with a few large shallow pits or dimples, cream and bluish 
cream in color, becoming much better green, more dimpled and 
larger under changed seasonal or soil conditions. As the cotyledon 
color is generally green, even under a cream skin, the variety is 
properly placed in this section. The pods were ready for use in 
about 10 weeks after late sowing, requiring a week to 10 days longer 
after early sowing. The crops were fair to good. 

Leader. Refs. 57; Ann. Hort. 194. 1891; Allan 
Cat. 1914. There are evidently two Leader peas, 
the first originating about 1868, said to be one of Lax- 
ton's new crosses, from Veitch Perfection and Little 
Gem, and much like the former, tho probably earlier. 
This cross should give a wrinkled pea, but available 
descriptions leave this point in doubt. A broken series 
of references, many of them American, seems to con- 
nect this pea with Johnson's Leader, called a " round- 
seeded Gradus " and said to be a selection of the round 
seeds of that variety; but we were unable to find time 
or place of its origin. Several strains of Leader were 
grown here recently, all much alike and all agreeing in 



general characteristics with those given for Johnson's 
Leader, though rather more dwarf than indicated by the 
varying figures for height found in different references. 
Short, stout-vined; foliage dense, medium to dark green, 
somewhat whitened and only slightly glaucous' flowers from the 
9th node up; pods single, on very short, moderately heavy stalks. 
3}^ to 4 inches long, broad, fairly plump, slightly curved, with 
pointed or long-rounded, tipless ends, of good green color: peas few, 
large, oval and flattened, dark green; seeds large, semi-smooth to 
almost wrinkled, mixed green and cream, with tendency to increased 
green and more wrinkling in favorable pea seasons. It is a second- 
early in season and gave good to very good crops. It is apparently 
a better pea than Pilot. The dimpled-seeded Leader grown at 
Wisley in 1925 was 5 feet tall, but otherwise like the descriptions 
above. (Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 52:109. 1927.) 

Blue Peter. Refs. 58, 59. Carter introduced Blue 
Peter before 1872, when it was given a First Class 
Certificate by the Royal Horticultural Society. It was 
called a larger, better and earlier Tom Thumb with 
" blue " seeds. As received here, from France, the 
seeds are dull green, with some cream, more or less 
angular or square and only slightly dented or dimpled. 

The variety came to America within ten years of 
its introduction but seed of it could not be located 
in this country for our recent tests. It was grown at 
the Station from 1882 to 1884 and fully described in 
1884. In a list of the peas grown at the Station (Bui. 69) 
in 1893 for display at the World's Fair Blue Peter is 
called McLean's, and said to be one of the best of its 
class. Prof. Goff's descriptions do not differ in any 
material way from those secured here later, altho he 
mentions as characteristic a decrease in size of the leaves 
toward the top of the stem, a point we did not observe, 
nor is it spoken of by others. His plants were very 
slightly taller and pods a little longer and perhaps 
better filled than those we grew. 

Very dwarf, rarely over a foot in height, with some branches 
both at base and above; foliage abundant to dense, very dark green 
glaucous, but not whitened: leaflets and stipules small: tendrils 
conspicuous slender, moderately curled; flowers begin at the 6tb 
node: pods in pairs on short, heavy stalks, 2J4 to 2 3 4 inches long, 
rather narrow, but moderately plump, straight, rounded at the end 
with small tip. not quite as dark in color as the foliage' peas 5-7 
rather large, indented, oval to almost cylindrical, medium to dark 
green; seeds medium in size, about 130 to the ounce, smooth, semi 
smooth or slightly dimpled, and dull green in color. The crops 
were very good, and early for dimpled peas. 

Fillbasket. Refs. 60-63. Laxton raised this variety 
before 1872 and it was sent in that year to the Royal 
Horticultural Society gardens for testing under another 
name, which, because the plants bore so very freely of 
large pods, was changed by a Committee of the Society 
to Fillbasket. It received a First Class Certificate. It 
is said to be a Standard x Laxton Supreme cross. It 
soon became popular, was grown in France, and reached 
America about 1882, being grown in Station tests in 1883 
and 1884. " Improved " strains of it have been dis- 
tributed at various times, in both England and America, 
one of the latter being Simon's Fillbasket, introduced in 
1890 by Moore 8s Simon. As grown here recently this 
seemed really an improvement, taller in vine and rather 
later than the other strain tried. The crops were better 
and the pods decidedly longer and broader, not quite as 



48 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



plump, and contained more and larger peas, both pods 
and peas being somewhat better in color 

The strain grown by the Station in 1884 seems to 
have been lighter in color of foliage, pods and peas than 
either of those grown recently, and intermediate in 
height and pod size between these two strains. 

The better strain, Simon's Fillbasket, was 4 4' u . feet tall: 
stem stout, with few medial branches; foliage abundant to dense, 
dark green, slightly glaucous and whitened, with 4 5 very large 
leaflets, and large, deeply clasping stipules; flowers at the 12th 
node, pods paired on long, thick stalks; 3 1 , to 4 1 , inches long. 
broad, moderately plump, straight, with long rounded to rounded 
cn.ls. only moderately well filled, peas 6-8, large, rounded oblong, 
medium green. Seeds varied in color from cream to dark green, 
oval to oblong in shape, semi-smooth to slightly wrinkled. Nine 
weeks or more were needed for marketable pods, but the plants 
nued to produce for three weeks giving splendid crops, — 
among the best. 

Telegraph. Refs. 64-70. This Telegraph, pre- 
cursor of the familiar Telephone, is entirely distinct 
from the older, little-known, smooth-seeded pea of the 
same name. It originated before 1877' with Culverwell, 
probably from a Veitch Perfection x Laxton Prolific 
Long-pod cross, and was introduced by Carter. It was 
decidedly the best of the dimpled peas of its time, with 
a very strong stem, usually branched, 4 5 feet tall. 
covered with fine dark green foliage, and producing 
abundantly long, broad, plump pods, straight or slightly 
curved, dark green in color and well filled with large, 
oblong or slightly compressed peas, of better quality 
than any but those of the true wrinkled type. 

It was widely grown in England, and to some extent 
in France, while it flourished in America from 1882, at 
first under its own name, but later, and more generally, 
under Cleveland's synonym. Long Island Mammoth 
or Marrowfat i, under which name it is still usually 
listed here. 

It was grown at the Station from 1882 1884 under 
its own name, and during our recent tests under the 
synonym. The old description might almost be substi- 
tuted for the one lately made tho the latter shows 
some deterioration in decreasing size of pods and peas. 

Improved Telegraph, New Telegraph and Super- 
Telegraph have been introduced at various times, and 
have maintained the good qualities of the original 
Telegraph, if, indeed, they have not improved them in 
the direction of shortening the vines, lowering the 
flowering node, lengthening the pods, removing the tip- 
ward taper, and making them more uniform, increasing 
the size of the peas and improving color of both pods 
and peas. All the strains fail, at the Station, to give 
the full, many-seeded, plump pods secured in England. 

It remains, however, rather more productive than 
Telephone. 

Pride <>f th<- Market. Refs. 76: Jour. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. .'U:717. 1910; Burpee Cat. 1886; Gard. 
Chron. 3rd ser. 22:276. 1877. This pea is credited 
by Sutton to Culverwell, while a French reference 



says it is Laxton's; but it is generally given as Carter's 
Pride of the Market since that firm introduced it about 
1881, when it was given a First Class Certificate by the 
Royal Horticultural Society. It came to America very 
promptly. 1883, and is still listed here, tho the seed we 
received from a prominent firm, on plants from which 
we based our description sheets, proves not to have been 
true to name. The description here given is, therefore, 
that secured in 1925 on a visit to the test plats of the 
U. S. Department of Agriculture at McMillan, Mich. 
This corresponds very closely to Prof. Goff's description 
made in 1884. 

A very vigorous dwarf pea. l'j to 1 :i i feet tall: stem stout, 
upright, not needing support, often with both basal and medial 
branches; foliage abundant, light green, consisting of large, rather 
broad leaflets in 4s and slightly larger, whitened stipules with very 
shallow teeth on the lower half of the margin; pods usually single, 
on short heavy stalks, almost straight, 4 to 4'| inches long with 
rather long necks, broad, tapering gradually to rounded or blunt 
ends with very short straight tips, dark green in color with much 
bloom; frequently with a slight curve in the dorsum toward the tip 
giving a peculiar sharpened or " beaked " appearance; peas 5 or 
G 4 8, Goff . pale green, ovate, compressed; seeds large > 72 to 
ounce , dull green or variously tinted to creamy white, and dimpled 
or somewhat wrinkled. 

It is moderately prolific, ready in midseason, and 
ripening rather gradually. 

Another Pride of the Market recently tested at 
Wisley, England, originated in Australia; and is later 
and poorer in color of both pods and peas than the one 
here described. 

Earl) Bird. Refs. 76; Gard. Chron. 'n. ser.) 
28:618. 1887; Bolgiano. J. Cat. 1918. Early Bird is 
referred to as " from Mr. Berberry " but he is not 
given as originator, and Knight's not Thos. Andrew 
Knight, breeder of wrinkled peasi Early Bird, grown here 
from seed produced on the United States Department 
of Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich., proved to be 
identical with our true Early Bird. The variety is 
said to be a Kenilworth x Advancer cross, and to be of 
as good quality as the latter pea or Telephone, but not 
as good as Ne Plus Ultra. The first reference we have 
to it was in 1884; but it seems to have been long in reach- 
ing America, apparently not listed before 1917. By 
some seedsmen Early Bird and Acquisition are held 
synonymous. 

As with Pride of the Market, seed untrue to name 
was received here for testing but this was discovered in 
time for a test of the true variety to be made in 1926. 
This supports the English characterizations of it as a 
dw-arf, improved William the First. 

Height, 1 to lJi feet: much branched; pods rather variable, 
some more than 4 inches long and others just above 3 inches, 
broad, moderately plump, slightly curved toward the tip, filled to 
the edge but not to the exceedingly long rounded end; peas 4 to 7 
of which one or more at tip and at base were often abortive mak- 
ing the average of good peas about 5), large, round, oval, somewhat 
flattened, and only medium green in color, as are the pods. Pods 
could be harvested in early midseason and the crop was only fair. 



' The date of origin is sometimes given as 1868, but unless it was very slowly developed this is probably incorrect, as Carter's adver- 
t in 1878 calls it "new and distinct" and prices packets of it as 3s 6d 80c ; and Hogg, in 1873, mentions only the old 
Telegraph. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



49 



Evolution. Refs. 79, 80: N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:136. 
1889. Evolution originated about 1882 and reached 
America in 1886. Laxton. who bred it, says: " A 
remarkably fine but unfixable pea; " but the latter 
failing has apparently been remedied, since there seems 
to be little difference between the peas described here in 
1888, in 1893 (Bui. 69), and recently. 

In general, it has a much branched stem of medium height, 
dense, dark green foliage, is productive tho late, bears large, round 
oval, deep green peas and grayish green or deep green dimpled 
or slightly wrinkled peas; but it is especially notable for its fine, 
3'o to 4 inch long, broad, plump, distinctly curved pods well filled, 
rich deep green in color, usually borne in pairs. 

The beautiful pods were favorites at the numerous 
exhibitions of peas in England. 

Ameer iRefs. 85 91 ) originated about 1885 from 
crosses made by Thomas Laxton, probably between 
undistributed seedling peas, one an early blue wrinkled 
type, and the other tracing to Little Gem. He sold the 
stock to Harrison (2), who introduced the variety. It 
received a First Class Certificate from the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society in 1885 and an Award of Merit in 1901. 
It was reintroduced by Hurst, about 30 years later. 
Seed from the earlier introduction reached America 
about 1898: but most American stocks probably trace 
to the reintroduced stock either in the original or an 
improved type. From a general similarity of its pods 
to those of Alaska, tho they are much larger, Ameer 
is often known as Large-podded Alaska, which leads to 
great confusion, as there are true Alaska-type peas 
bearing this name and that of Long-podded Alaska. 

Claudit, introduced considerably later and a dis- 
tinct pea, was quite similar to Ameer; and both names 
have become synonyms of both varieties; while Ameer, 
particularly, has also been confused with Bountiful and 
Acquisition. 

It is almost impossible to be certain, now, that any 
American stock is that of the true Ameer. Most of 
those sold appear to be much shorter in vine than those 
described in English references, the one grown at the 
Station, from seed raised by a widely known and very 
careful seedsman, being only 2 feet in height. It is 
known to grow half taller than this elsewhere. This 
strain agrees in foliage color, general shape and color 
of pods, peas and seeds, in productivity and in season, 
with those grown in England but the pods are somewhat 
shorter, rarely exceeding 3 inches, and less curved. 
Seeds and peas are of medium size, only, the seeds being 
mixed cream and green, oval or square, and only slightly 
indented. It was ready in midseason and gave a fair crop. 

British Lion. Refs. 92, 92a; Jour. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. 41:283. 1915; Hallawell Cat. 1924. When first 
introduced, before 1886, British Lion was said to be 
much better than Telephone, which was regarded as one 
of its parents, bearing its pods nearer the ground. The 
other parent was Omega, the cross being made by Lax- 
ton. We have no record of its early arrival in America, 
but seeds came to us from the Idaho Station in 1922. 

Height 314 feet: stems moderately stout, branched at the base; 
foliage abundant, medium to light green, leaflets in 4s; flowers at 



10th node; pods single on short, rather heavy stalks; from 3 ' g to 
3J-2 inches, very uniform, moderately broad, plump, straight, with 
rounded, tipless ends, filled both to tip and edge, medium green 
in color; peas averaging 6, large, round oval, very dark green. 
Seeds medium in size, round to oval, slightly indented, shallowly 
pitted or slightly wrinkled and grayish green or light green in color. 
Edible peas were ready in early midseason and the crops were fair 
to good. 

The same or another unseparable British Lion 
again came into attention in England about 1913, and 
was probably the source of an American reintroduction 
in 1924 as " a new semi-dwarf early variety having large, 
dark green pointed pods; a very heavy cropper." Only 
a partial description was secured here from plants grown 
from this stock, but no characteristic differences were 
noted. 

Still another pea of this name was highly recom- 
mended by the Royal Horticultural Society (Jour 52: 
109. 1927) in 1926. This is said to have been raised 
by Cullen; but seems to differ but little from Laxton's 
British Lion. 

The British Lion listed in the U. S. Patent Office 
Report for 1865 could not have been any of those 
described above. 

Early Prize (Ref. 95) is an American pea, originat- 
ing before 1889 with a Mr. Read of Vermont, and said 
to be a Tom Thumb x Advancer cross. 

It appears to maintain very well its dwarf character, as it 
was only 1 ? 4 feet high as grown here recently; pods paired; not as 
long as early descriptions would imply, rarely reaching 3 inches; 
more abrupt at the ends and contained as many or more peas than 
in earlier tests. The pods and peas were only fair in color and of 
medium size; but the green color and marked dimpling of the seeds 
indicate good quality; and the crops were good. 

Bountiful (Refs. 96-100) was introduced by Sut- 
ton in 1892 after trial by the Royal Horticultural 
Society in 1891. It is said to have come from crossing 
Sangster No. 1 and Telephone, and was like Ameer, but 
considered superior to it. It was given XXX, the 
highest rank, by the Society in 1896 and again in 1915; 
and seems to have been thoroughly fixed in type in 
England but as brought to America, about 10 years 
after its introduction, it proved much shorter-vined, tho 
retaining the pod and pea characters of the original; 
and as grown here for three seasons it was still more 
dwarf. The height in England was from 3}_> to 5 feet; 
early American references make it 2 ' ■> to 3 feet, and in 
our tests it was usually under 2 feet. 

Vine slender, showing Sangster No. 1 influence; foliage 
abundant, medium green in color, with 4 small, even-colored leaflets 
and slightly larger, somewhat whitened stipules; pods generally 
single; usually from 2 :i 4 to 3 inches long, but occasionally here and 
generally elsewhere, somewhat longer, moderately broad, plump, 
slightly curved, medium green in color, filled both to the edge and 
to the pointed and tipless end; peas 7-8, moderately large, round 
or indented and oblong, medium to dark green. Seeds medium 
or small in size, round oval, indented, slightly pitted, and occasion- 
ally almost wrinkled. Pods were ready with or slightly earlier 
than those of Ameer, and crop about the same, almost good. 

Bountiful Big Pod, spoken of in 1913 as new and of 
English origin, was probably only Bountiful, tho said 
to be of marked branching habit, not a Bountiful 
characteristic. 



50 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



( laudit Refs. 90, 102 > was introduced in 1900 by 
J. M. Squier of Canada but a recent letter from C. M. 
Squier says the original stock came from France. It 
is very similar to, but not identical with. Ameer, bitter. 
closer bred and much easier to keep true to type. The 
pods are plumper, due to thick, meaty shells which 
promote good keeping in market, more curved at the 
end; and tho decidedly lighter in color, have a very 
marked dark green stripe along the dorsal suture which 
makes them attractive. Ameer does not show this 
stripe noticeably, but has on the dorsum, near the tip, 
a characteristic depression of the suture which Claudit 
does not show. 

Claudit. as grown here, is also decidedly taller in 
\ ine than Ameer. It is practically the same in season 
and in productivity, the slightly longer pods and greater 
number of peas being counterbalanced by the smaller 
size of the peas. It is very doubtful if the two varieties 
could be distinguished by the seeds, although those of 
Claudit were slightly smaller as received here; and both 
are very similar to those of Bountiful. 

Old <rl<>r\ Ref. 105 appears to have been intro- 
duced by Breck in 1903: and it is an excellent, early. 
almost dwarf pea. with somewhat variant, but generally 
well compressed, dimpled or almost wrinkled, grayish 
green seeds. As grown here recently: 

Height 1 3 4 to 2 feet: stem rather slender: few or no branches: 
foliage moderately abundant, dark to medium green, slightly 
whitened: flowers begin at the 11th node, both single and paired, 
on long, slender stalks: pods about 3 inches or slightly more in 
length, broad to medium in width and very plump, straight, and 
pointed to rounded at the end, usually very well filled: peas 5 to 
7. large, round, almost globular, medium green, ready fcr use earlier 
than most dimpled peas, and so numerous as to give a good to very 
good crop. 

It seems a very worthy variety for this group, but 
is not widely known. 

1 ssei s l;ir Ref. 113 is of English origin, said to 
have been introduced by Cullen, probably about 1904. 
It has been listed in this country, and seed of it was 
sent to the Station for testing in 1924. It does not 
differ noticeably from several other recent English peas 
of this group; but was one of the best pod producers 
and fairly early, tho the pods fill slowly and not very well; 
so that the actual yield of peas is not above the average. 
The peas are very large and of better quality than many 
other dimpled peas. The seeds are rather large, pitted, 
but not wrinkled; and vary much in color. 

Acquisition. Refs. 119. 120; Sutton Car. 1914. 
An Acquisition was introduced by Baker in 1909, 
and said to be a sport found in a field of Stratagem ; 
but enough of description is not given to prove this the 
same or different from the Acquisition announced as 
new by Sutton in 1914 and described as a larger, darker- 
podded Bountiful. They are at least exceedingly similar; 
but American introductions are evidently of the Sutton 
stock, so the question of identity must remain unsettled. 
This is the more true since two lots of seed of Acquisition, 
obtained from the same seedsman in different years, were 
themselves different and gave quite different plants, 
pods and crops. It is possible that one of these strains 



was really Early Bird, as Acquisition is by some given as 
a synonym of that variety. 

Characters of the strain which seem to correspond K 
English descriptions: Height 2 ' _• feet, with a few basal branches: 
foliage medium in amount and in greenness, with large, broad 
leaflets and slightly larger stipules, blunt to rounded at the tip; 
flowers at the 11th node: pods single on long stalks, very long. 
4 to 4'_> inches, occasionally almost 5, broad, fairly plump, straight, 
with pointed ends, late in filling and rarely perfectly filled; peas 
5-6, very large, oblong, whitish green or light green; seeds large 
<94 to the ounce I semi-smooth to pitted, round oval, bluish or 
grayish cream. 

The other strain had much smaller seeds, was shorter in vim, 
without branches, with foliage more whitened, small not broad 
leaflets, and sharp-tipped stipules; flowered at the 8th or 9th node 
and bore shorter pods, rarely 3 inches long, somewhat broader, 
with one-third more peas, which were decidedly smaller. 

The season of the two strains differed but little, 
both early midseason; but the small-seeded strain gave 
distinctly better crops. 

Neither strain warranted the praise given Acquisi- 
tion in England, and by some growers in America; but 
the pods of the large-seeded strain are very attractive; 
and if well filled and more abundant would make Acquisi- 
tion a fine variety. It is evidently quite sensitive to 
variations in soil and seasonal conditions. 

Superb. Refs. 124. 125. Laxton sent Superb to 
the Royal Horticultural Society tests in 1911, and it 
was again tested in 1913, 1917, and 1920, receiving the 
award Highly Commended in the latter year It has 
been listed by several American seedsmen, first in 1919, 
and was grown in our tests from two different seed stocks, 
one from England. The strains differed but little. 

Very dwarf, 1 ' 4 to 1 ' '> feet, with '°ng pods, 3'j to 4 inches, 
slightly curved, with pointed or rounded ends. The foliage from 
the English seed was lighter in color, with larger leaflets and stipules, 
blossoms higher on the vine, pods lighter colored, with more and 
smaller peas, and ready about 5 days earlier. The seeds of both 
were large, oval, or cblong, flattened and mixed cream and green. 
Both gave good crops, that from the acclimated American seed 
the better. 

Carter's Early Superb is apparently a first early pea, 
developed from Superb, and very similar to it. This 
is probably not yet known in the United States. 

Wonderful Ref. 141 was introduced in 1921 by 
Schell; and as grown here seems an improvement on 
practically all the dimpled peas tested, as the crops 
were good to very good, pods large, dark green and 
attractive, and the peas large and remarkably sweet for 
the type. 

Height 1 3 4 feet' stem stout, almost erect, occasionally branched 
at the base, dense, medium to dark green foliage, of 4-5 exceedingly 
large leaflets and larger stipules rounded and slightly waved at the 
tip, distinctly glaucous and resistant to disease; pods single and 
paired, begin at the 10th node on long, stout stalks. 4 1 ( 4 , inches 
long, broad, moderately plump, straight, with pointed to long rounded 
ends, not quite perfectly filled: peas averaging 8, large, round oval, 
indented, with peculiar, almost conical tips: seeds very large, com- 
pressed, nearly wrinkled and of a distinct bluish cream to bluish 
green or light green color. The pods are ready in early midseason. 

World Beater fRef. 148 1. cataloged by Williams 
in 1923, seems to vary as much or more in seeds than any 
other dimpled pea. Those received here in 1924 were 
hardly more than smooth peas with one-third or one- 




Dwarf, dimpled-seed 



SUPERB 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




Curved-podded, cream-seeded type 



ALLAN CANNER 



(Two-thirds natural sil 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



51 



half slightly pitted or dimpled, while those bought in 
1926 from the same company, tho showing the same gen- 
eral size and color, would be classed without hesitation 
as wrinkled peas. The pods show slight variations 
also: and are much more rounded at the ends than those 
of other dimpled peas, often square. They are quite 
even in size, from 2; 5 4 to 3's inches long, moderately 



broad, almost plump and straight. They soon show a 
finely netted deep wrinkling, which with their some- 
what light green color would apparently make them 
rather poor market peas. The pods set low, and are 
single, yet give a fair crop, ready in midseason. The 
stems are 3 to 3^ feet tall, moderately stout, and often 
branched both at the base and above. 



WRINKLED, CREAM SEEDED GROUP 
As with the Dimpled -seeded Group, the varieties 
included in our Wrinkled, Cream-seeded Group are 
united by only one character, expressed in the name of 
the group. This is a distinctive, and usually quite 
constant, character; and allows a preliminary separation 
of varieties by the seeds alone, something not possible 
with succeeding groups of wrinkled peas. Many of the 
varieties included might well fall in other groups, and a 
few are mentioned in such groups, or the other group 
is referred to under description of the variety included 
here. There is a considerable variation in the degree 
of wrinkling of the seeds of different varieties in the 
group; and some varieties occasionally show some 
admixture of greenish seeds, this condition being influ- 
enced, tho less markedly, by soil or seasonal variations 
which so noticeably affected the dimpled-seeded peas. 
Usually the seeds of varieties included are practically 
all cream- colored. Many of these trace to the " white- 
seeded " varieties bred by Thos. Andrew Knight; but 
it is not thought advisable to attempt any very strict 
historical or chronological arrangement of the varieties, 
except such as is indicated by the succession of names, 
synonyms and dates as given in the grouped references. 
Convenience has led to a series of sub-groups based 
more or less definitely and more or less accurately on 
the heights of the plants. 

MAJOR VARIETIES OF WRINKLED. CREAM- 
SEEDED GROUP 



VERY DWARF PLANTS 

Minimum. Refs. 1, 2; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:266. 
1885. Except some peas grown in Europe for borders 
and incidental pod production. Minimum is probably 
the smallest cultivated pea, frequently being only 6 
inches tall, tho bearing a fair load of pods. It is Lax- 
ton's, introduced about 1880 by Hurst and brought to 
the United States in 1882. It was tested at this Station 
in 1884, and grown in many places in the country for at 
least a decade; but the small size of the pods and the 
low yields, except under practically forcing conditions 
in hand-worked gardens, soon retired it from commerce. 
The stems were very short-jointed, foliage light green, 
and the short (1} ■> to 2 inch), straight, blunt-ended pods 
were still paler. The seeds were very small. 

Sutton Harbinger (Refs. 4, 5) was introduced in 
1898 and received an Award of Merit from the Royal 
Horticultural Society in 1901, which was confirmed 
in 1915, but not given in 1921. Our first American 
record of it is dated 1903; it was still listed as late as 
1919; and seed of it was received here from British 
Columbia in 1922. It is very different from Laxton 



Harbinger, an Alaska-type pea probably never grown 
in America. 

We found it a very dwarf, very early, heavy-cropping variety, 
with distinctly shorter pods than those of Mighty Atom, borne 
from 5th or 6th node up, blunt to square ended, and with from 3-5 
light green peas, considerably smaller but of better quality than 
those of Mighty Atom. 

Reading Wonder. Refs. 7; Burpee Cat. 1913. 
Reading Wonder was introduced in 1908 by Sutton and 
reached the United States in 1913. It was grown at 
the Station for several seasons and also in the U. S. 
Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich. 
The plants at McMillan, and those grown here from 
seeds from that place, were taller and pods distinctly 
larger than those we grew from British Columbia seed. 

It was dwarf to very dwarf, almost as early and yielding 
about as well as Harbinger, with pods as long or longer than those 
of Mighty Atom, and pointed or long-rounded like that variety, 
not quite as well colored, with fewer and larger peas of decidedly 
better quality. 

Clibran Masterpiece (Ref. 8), introduced by 
Clibran within a very few years, is distinct from Suttcn 
Masterpiece, a comparatively old, green, wrinkled main- 
crop pea. 

Clibran's pea is not yet in commerce in this country; 
but has been grown in the U. S. Department of Agricul- 
ture plats at McMillan, Mich., and at this Station; 
and for its good qualities and apparent resistance to 
disease, it deserves further trial. 

It is exceedingly dwarf, 1 foot here: stems rather slender; 
foliage abundant: pods 3 ! 4 to 3 a 4 inches- quite broad, moderately 
plump, straight or slightly curved at the tips, with long-rounded 
ends, not, with us, very well filled; peas 3 to 5, large, peculiarly 
wedge-shaped, or almost conical opposite the hilum, of very good 
quality; seeds very large, long oval and finely wrinkled. Crops 
very good, early midseason. 

DWARF PLANTS 

Chelsea Gem. Refs. 14-16; Dreer Cat. 1896. 
Chelsea Gem originated with Jas. Veitch about 1887; 
and may have reached the United States in 1889 as 
Chelsea, that name being found in American catalogs as 
late as 1921 but apparently not used in England. Pos- 
sibly Chelsea and Chelsea Gem are distinct, but the 
descriptions agree closely. The latter name seems not 
to have been used in America until 1896; and neither 
name was found in recent catalogs. 

Seed of it. from Holland, was secured in 1922 thru 
the Wisconsin Station and crops were grown for three 
years. It was also grown here in 1890, but only brief 
data regarding it were secured. 

Our late trials prove it still a fine variety, about 1?4 feet tall, a 
week later than earliest wrinkled peas, with very good crops of pods 
usually more than 3 inches long, medium green in color, decidedly 



52 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



curved, and with pointed to rounded ends, plump and containing 

5 or 6 moderately large, rather oblong, light colored peas, which 
change to small, square or cylindrical, very finely wrinkled smls. 
without green. The peas are not quite equal in quality to the 
green wrinkled Gems. 

Chelsea Rival, offered by Hurst & Son. London, 
since 1919 at least, is an improvement on Chelsea Gem, 
with light green seeds. Grown here in 1925 in our 
tests of canning peas, it proved earlier and better than 
either strain of Canners' Gem tested. 

Delicia Ref. 20) was probably introduced into 
America in 1905 by Marlow, and the synonym, Delica- 

n. indicates German origin. It had quite a vogue 
in the middle west and was cataloged as recently as 
1923, but seems now to have disappeared. 

The name, and synonym, particularly, tend to con- 
fuse this pea with Delicates from Holland, and Delica- 
tesse. a Carter name, both of which are probably Petit 
Pois. or French Canner, peas of the wrinkled type, and 
quite distinct from Delicia, since the latter is a dwarf 
early or second early pea, the others medium to tall 
midseason varieties, with curved pods and seeds dis- 
tinctly shaded bluish or green. 

As grown here for two seasons, Delicia is about 2 feet tall. 
with a slender, trailing vine and rather scanty, light green, delicate 
foliage of 4 small leaflets and only slightly larger stipules. Tho 
not tall, the slender vines need support as the rather heavy pods 
soon reach the ground. Pods begin at the 10th node, single, on 
short, slender stalks. 2 ■ L > to 3 ' * inches long, of medium width, quite 
plump, distinctly veined or wrinkled before ready for use. straight, 
well filled to the blunt or square ends which carry distinct tips; 
slightly darker than the foliage, medium green; peas 5 or 6, moder- 
ately large, oval or oblong, often indented, light green; seeds small. 
often flattened and very' much wrinkled indicating good quality if 
harvested before too far advanced; crop about as early as any, 
and lasts but a short time, giving a small total yield. 

Marvellous. Rcfs. 21 23; Farquhar Car. 1914. 
Marvellous was introduced by Hurst about 1913, 
came to this country very promptly, and is still listed 
here. 

It was grown in our tests for two seasons, but did 
not quite fulfill expectations as to prolificacy or earliness. 
It was not generally double-podded, nor were the pods 
larger than most of the varieties in this group while 
decidedly smaller than those of Mighty Atom, Referen- 
dum, and, particularly. Allotment Holder. The pods 
are straight, rounded to blunt at the ends, and well 
filled, but not especially well colored. 

Another Marvellous is announced as new in the 
1920 Laxton catalog and said to be very dwarf, to have 
paired pods twice as large as those of Little Marvel and 
to be a second early. Still further improvement is 
claimed for this variety in Marvellous Improved, listed 
by the same firm in 1925. 

Color of the Laxton peas is not known but the 
varieties are included here because of apparent dupli- 
cation of names. 

Sutton Pioneer. Refs. 24, 25; Burpee Cat. 
1911. This Pioneer is in no way like the old Extra 
Early Pioneer, and differs from Cooper, Eckford, Sharpe, 
and Webb peas of the same name, none of which has 
probably been grown commercially in America. 



Sutton Pioneer was introduced in 1906, was listed 
in America in 1911, became quite well known and is 
still sold. It is generally cream-seeded, but almost all 
stocks show a few light green seeds; and under cer- 
tain conditions, as in our tests of 1922, many seeds are 
green. This type is noticed on p. 62. 

Height 1 ' ■< to 1 :< i feet; stems -tout, drooping with the heavy 
pods, with occasional basal branches; foliage dense, dark green, 
slightly whitened; pods begin at the 8th or 9th node, usually single 
and carried by short thick stalks which often show a small leaf, 
are from 3 ' i to 3 • N inches long, broad, moderately plump to plump, 
slightly curved especially toward the pointed, small-tipped ends, 
and dark green in color; peas 5 or 6, very large, long oval, and dark 
green in color. The crops are very good, beginning as late second 
early or early midseason and holding for two weeks or more. The 
quality is very good. 

We have found Pioneer one of the best peas of this 
group. 

Sutton Hundredfold. Refs. 26; Landreth Car. 
1917. This Hundredfold, announced in 1910 and 
reaching America in 1917, is entirely distinct from Carter 
Hundredfold (see p. 43 1. It is probably derived from 
Pioneer, above, from which it differs in its slightly 
darker foliage and even darker, larger pods, altho two 
strains of it grown here differed more from each other 
in minor details than either did from Pioneer. With us 
it was fully as early as Pioneer, though reported else- 
where as a day or so later; and gave as good, if not better 
crops. 

Early Lexington Ref. 27) appears to have been 
first listed in 1923 by Breck, is undoubtedly of Massa- 
chusetts origin and probably of the firm's breeding. 

Described by the introducer as 3)2 feet tall, it grew at the 
Station to only 1 ' i feet, and is therefore included with other second 
early, dwarf, wrinkled, cream-seeded peas. Pods start low on the 
stem. 7th or 8th node, are shorter than those of Pioneer, 2 :, 4 to 3 
inches long, dark to medium green, straight, very plump and well 
filled to the pointed ends, the dorsum also sloping so the tip of the 
pod is near the center; peas 5 or 6, very large, compressed, cylin- 
drical, deep green, fine quality. 

Although the pods are rather short and borne singly, 
they are well distributed and continue to mature for 
nearly three weeks, giving a crop ranking with the best 
of the group. 

\<« Era 'Ref. 28 1 was introduced by Williams in 
or before 1918. Tho called a straight-podded type, 
the illustration given and the pods as grown here show a 
decided curve toward the point of the pod. Neither pods 
nor peas were as good green with us as we anticipated 
from the introducer's description. 

Pods about the same length, but less curved than those of 
Chelsea Gem, 2 ' , to 3 1 1 inches long, plump, pointed or very long 
rounded at the end, and usually contain about 7 fairly large, flat- 
tened, oblong or cylindrical, light green peas. Two lots of seeds 
were secured, both from the introducer, which were cream without 
green in one case 'seeds said to have been grown in Idaho) and 
green with little cream in the other grown in Europe 1. 

Height 1 ' _, to 2 feet tall; stems drooping enough to render 
support desirable; pods single, from the 11th node, matured as a 
rather late second early and gave good crops. 

New Era gave fully as good, if not better, crops than 
Gradus on much dwarfer plants: but in 1927, under 
rather unfavorable conditions, the crop was no better 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



53 



than good, much inferior to that of Duke Delight, grown 
with it. 

Daisy. 1 Refs. 32 37. Daisy was sent in 1891 and 
later by Carter for testing by the Royal Horticul- 
tural Society, and has received several awards, tho 
not honored in 1925. It was introduced in 1892. It 
was about 5 years in reaching America but was soon 
widely distributed and is still considerably grown. It 
is said to be a cross between Stratagem and an unnamed 
pea, itself a cross between Culverwell Giant Marrow and 
Stratagem. Daisy and Dwarf Telephone, now probably 
inextricably mixed, were originally distinct. (See p. 61.) 

Carter's Daisy was grown here for two non-coincident seasons 
from one of two different seed stocks, these two strains proving 
very similar, if not identical, altho the plants of one strain, possibly 
because of late sowing in a dry, warm season, were much more dwarf, 
and podded much lower down on the stem. In both of these strains, 
however, the plants were characteristically different from those of 
most other peas in this group, having large leaflets and very large 
stipules of a peculiar light, faintly yellowish, green color; and the 
upper joints lengthened slowly thus giving a top-heavy or bunched 
appearance of the upper stem. The strain grown from early plant- 
ing in a comparatively moist season developed many basal branches, 
the other strain few or none. 

Height, 10 to 12 inches, of branched strain, 1 3 4 to 2 feet; pods 
and peas of the two strains alike, pods from 4', to 4 3 4 inches long, 
very uniform for such large pods, broad, fairly plump, decidedly 
wrinkled when ready for use, straight or very slightly curved, not 
filling out to the edge but well filled to the pointed or very long 
rounded, tipless end; peas 7 to 9, large, smooth, round or slightly 
oval oblong, and light green in color, of excellent quality but slightly 
too thick-skinned as compared with peas of the Gem type: seeds 
very large, cream with a faint bluish or greenish tint and moderately 
wrinkled. 

Seeds of a Daisy pea not specified as Carter's came 
to us from the Idaho Station, from which plants devel- 
oped quite similar in general characteristics, but inter- 
mediate in some respects between the other two strains, 
as tall as the taller, but podding low like the shorter - 
vined type. The pods were nearly half an inch shorter 
than those of the other two strains, but otherwise similar 
and containing as many peas which, of course, were 
smaller. 

The seeds sown were but little more than half as 
large as those of the two large-podded strains, but other- 
wise similar including a rather more noticeable bluish 
or greenish tint. The crop seeds were decidedly larger 
but still much smaller than crop seeds of the other two 
strains. Since we can find no record of any other Daisy 
than Carter's, we include this strain here; but if the name 
had been different, it would have been unhesitatingly 
accepted as another variety in spite of the similarities. 

All strains gave only fair to good crops, because of 
the comparatively small numbers of pods. The season 
was the same, discounting differences in planting time 
and seasons — early midseason. 

The Early and Improved types of Daisy have not 
been grown here under identifying names but possibly 
some of the strains have been of one or the other of the 
supposedly new types. Early Daisy is said to have 



darker foliage, with narrower and lighter colored pods 
than Daisy. Usually such " improved " varieties have 
been found only well selected stocks of deteriorating older 
strains. 

Lincoln. Refs. 38, 39; Thorburn Car. 1908. 
The Lincoln pea was introduced by Lincoln, prior to 
1908, in which year it reached America. It was " highly 
commended " in the 1925 pea trials of the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society and it reached the United States in 
that year. Seed of it came to the Station from Holland, 
thru Prof. Bushnell of the Minnesota Station, and was 
also purchased from two American seedsmen. The 
three strains proved alike tho differing slightly in size 
and shade of peas. 

Height about 2 feet; stems distinctly branched, rather stout, 
holding up the pods very well, especially where drilled in for a canning 
crop: foliage abundant, and medium or dark yellowish green; pods 
start at about the 1 2th node, occasionally paired tho usually single, 
3 1 s to 3 3 4 inches long, rather narrow but usually plump, decidedly 
curved from base to tip, but occasionally straight, and well filled 
to the long rounded, tipless end; much like Senator's in type; 
peas 6 to 8, large, compressed, oval, medium green, of fine quality; 
seeds small, 150 or more to the ounce, markedly cylindrical or almost 
square, well wrinkled and usually show a slight admixture of green 
with cream. The crops were very good, beginning in early midseason. 

Allan Canner (Ref. 40), developed in recent years, 
is very similar to Lincoln. It is not quite as tall, branches 
less, has rather darker foliage, averages more leaflets, 
and these and the stipules are sharper pointed and with 
more prominent teeth. The pods start a node or two 
lower on the vine, are more often paired, are slightly 
shorter and more slender, and contain rather more peas, 
making these smaller. Because of the paired pods, the 
crops are better; and are ready at the same time as those 
of Lincoln. 

Isbell Beauty. Refs. 41; and letter from Isbell, 
Jan. 27, 1927. Isbell introduced Beauty in 1920, it 
being selected from Kelway Beauty for earliness; and 
also has finely wrinkled, rather than dimpled seeds. 
As grown here it has been inferior to several other peas 
of this group, in size of pods, number of peas to the pod, 
yield and earliness. The peas are large and of good 
quality. The variety is of the dark-foliaged type, about 
1 3 4 feet tall, with pods starting low on the vine, straight 
and pointed or very long rounded, broad but not plump 
and of fairly good color but rather coarsely wrinkled. 

MEDIUM HEIGHT PLANTS 

Admiral (Ref. 49) is said to be an English pea 
introduced into the United States in 1891 by Hender- 
son. Tho no printed confirmation of this belief has 
been found, Admiral is apparently a selection, based on 
shorter vines and increased, shorter -period productivity, 
from Champion of Scotland, British Queen, or one of the 
Knight Marrows. Taller strains of the old Admiral 
resemble Champion of Scotland in practically all respects. 
As Admiral, Yellow Admiral, White Admiral and 
particularly as Green Admiral (introduced by Rogers), 



1 Daisy is included in this group because of its typical seeds, but the name is used for a section under the Large-podded Dwarf 
group characterized by vines of the Daisy type, light colored and " bunchy " at the top 



54 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



this pea and its improvements are among the leading 
canning peas of the country, being grown for this pur- 
pose much more widely than in gardens, where they are 
surpassed by shorter-vined peas of the same pod size 
or by taller peas with larger pods. 

Admiral is quite similar to Alaska in vine tho taller, and with 
heavier and darker foliage, and in pod shape, but the peaa art- 
larger, lighter in color, more crowded in tin pod, 6 to 8 in number, 
often indented, light green in color, with delicate skins and far bettl C 
in quality. The seeds are \ . I j small for wrinkled peas, cylindrical 
or square, indented, compressed and finely wrinkled, of even deep 
cream color. The Admirals give splendid crops about 10 days or 
two weeks later than those of Alaska, for the canners' harvest 
altho in the garden edible peas can be picked much earlier. 

White Admiral and Yellow Admiral are evidently 
strains of the old Admiral pea, which differ from each 
other, if at all, only in slight but seemingly constant 
differences in the tint of foliage and in the shade of 
cream color of the seeds, and from the old Admiral in 
shorter vines, greater productiveness and more uni- 
formity of pods, and in time of ripening. 

Green Idmiral. Refs. 50; Seed World 17:No. 
13:18. 1925. Green Admiral, since its seeds are green, 
does not really belong in this group, but is included 
here for convenience in description. It was developed 
from the cream-colored form by Rogers and differs from 
the other types in being a day or two later in our tests, 
at least, slightly darker in foliage, shorter or at least 
less erect in earlier stages of growth, and having light 
green instead of cream seeds. The peas are generally 
considered of better quality than those of White or 
Yellow Admiral. Green Admiral ranks next to Advancer 
in yield for canning, and gives a larger proportion of 
peas in higher priced grades than does Advancer. It is 
not quite of the best quality. 

Gradus (Refs. 58 61) is probably one of the best 
known peas in American gardens; but seems never to 
have become so popular in England where it originated. 
It is a Laxton pea, said to have received a First Class 
Certificate from the Royal Horticultural Society in 
1887, but according to another reference, was not yet 
introduced in 1890. It also was awarded Highly Com- 
mended in 1925 tests of the Society. It came to America 
in 1897; and was called " Prosperity " as the result of a 
prize name contest by a leading American seedsman, and 
is still carried under that name by that firm and others, 
but was listed the next year by several seedsmen in this 
country under its true English name. As introduced in 
England it was said to be as early as William the First, 
to have pods of the same size and as well filled as those 
of Duke of Albany, with large peas of as good quality 
as those of Ne Plus Ultra. As grown at this Station 
from seed from various sources, it has been somewhat 
disappointing, being taller, rather later and not setting 
as heavily as was expected. It seems to be hard to 
keep down to medium height, as early English references 
speak of it as 2 1 2 to 3 feet tall; but those after 1910, 
of which several record official tests, speak more often 
of 4, 4 1 •_, or even 5 feet than of shorter plants, and these 
figures correspond quite closely with those secured on 
Station grounds, where peas usually grow shorter, rather 



than taller, than in many localities. Even when sown 
late, Gradus here requires about 60 days to first pods, 
making it a full midseason variety. 

Height 4 to 4 ' j feet; rather slender stems, often branched at 
the base; foliage abundant to dense, medium green, decidedly 
blotched or marbled with white and comparatively free from bloom; 
leaflets usually 4 in number, small and regular in shape, and stipules 
very much larger, clasping the stem deeply, with rounded tips and 
shallow teeth; flowers abundant, large, white, beginning from the 
9th to the 11th node, single; pod stalks very long, thick, often 
leafy; pods 3'.| to3\ inches long, broad, rather long oval in sec- 
tion, straight or slightly curved, with pointed or long rounded ends, 
no distinct tips; peas 5 to 8, large, oblong, somewhat indented thru 
crowding in the pod; seeds usually clear bright cream in color or in 
some strains with nearly one-third green seeds and well wrinkled. 
The peas are of fine quality and crops good; but the variety is 
exceeded in both respects by newer varieties of the Thomas Laxton, 
Laxtonian, and Gem types. 

Gradus is generally classed with Blue Bantam, 
Dwarf Telephone, Laxtonian and others of the pointed- 
pod section of the Large-podded dwarf group; but color 
of seeds of the old type places it here. Length of vines 
would also exclude it from groups of dwarf peas. 

A Dwarf Gradus is referred to in both England and 
America, with plants described as from 1 ' | to 2 feet tall, 
but strains of these secured from the Pacific slope have 
been considerably taller, tho somewhat shorter than the 
regular strains of Gradus. They have also been some- 
what earlier; but this has probably been due to late 
seeding and dry warm seasons. 

Late Gradus is not included here, as the selection 
seems to have resulted in a green -seeded, tall pea of the 
Telephone type. 

illiance (Ref. 62) is generally called a synonym of 
Eugenie, next described; but according to the reference 
given it appears to have been a very similar but inferior 
pea, introduced the previous year by Harrison ll) as 
superior to his Glory which originated a year earlier 
still. 

Eugenie (Refs. 62-66), a white wrinkled marrow, 
and Napoleon, green-seeded, are said to have originated 
from two peas in the same pod, the plants being grown 
about 1855 by Harrison ( 1 ). The varieties were identical 
except for the color of the seeds. Eugenie and Alliance, 
and similarly Napoleon and Climax, if once distinct, 
soon became inseparably mixed, both in England and 
America, each of the first pair of names referring to one 
white-seeded variety, and of the latter pair to the same 
green-seeded one. Eugenie reached America within 5 or 
6 years after its English introduction, became widely dis- 
tributed here and was still listed at least as late as 1913. 

Grown at the Station in 1884 and 1886: Height 2j^ to 2 l A 
feet; stem slender, rarely branched; foliage deep green, of which the 
stipules, toward the base of the plants, were glaucous and washed 
with white; pods starting low on the stems, 5th or 6th node, single 
below and often paired above, on short stalks, tapering gradually 
to tip, variable in filling, being very poor below, often with only 
1 pea, while above they may have 7 or 8, broad and rather flat, 
pale green in color. French references say the pods were slightly 
curved and ends rounded; and confirm poor filling of lower pods. 
The peas were of fine quality and quite large, the dried seeds 
averaging about 85 to the ounce, the crop very good, ready rather 
late and maturing very slowly. 



•' 




A leading canners' pea 



GREEN ADMIRAL 



(Nearly natural size) 




Well known, old garden variety 



LITTLE GEM 



(Two-thirds natural siz 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



55 



As showing how little reliance can be placed on 
statements of time of ripening, comments on one exten- 
sive English trial say Eugenie is a second early pea, and 
Alliance (undoubtedly the same pea) third early; yet 
the figures given for this trial show that the two lots of 
seed sown 5 days apart in late April and early May 
gave edible peas a day apart only, and the third early 
was a day less in maturing than the second early. 

An American tester claimed peas of Eugenie 
sweeter than those of Napoleon; but said the seeds of 
Eugenie were light green. Evidently the varieties were 
reversed. 

Duchess of York. Refs. 76: Rice Cat. 1918. 
Duchess of York was introduced by Sutton in 1901, 
but seems to have been slow in coming to America, our 
first record of it being 1918. From its resemblance to 
Empress of India, it may be a seedling of that variety 
or a selection from it. 

It was grown here from seed sent us by the Idaho Station and 
the University of British Columbia. Height 2*4 to 3 feet, often 
branched at the base and occasionally above; foliage only noticeable 
from its large broad leaflets in 4s and its larger, more whitened 
stipules; flowers small and not very numerous, borne from the 
10th node up; pods single, 3^ to 3"s inches long, only moderately 
broad or plump las seen on U. S. Department of Agriculture 
plats, the pods were better, being classed as plump examples of 
Gradus type', straight but quite irregular in shape, poorly filled and 
with pointed ends, sloping both front and back; peas few in number, 
3 or 4 in a pod, dark green in color, very large, round or indented 
and oblong or flattened. The British Columbia seeds were much 
larger than those from Idaho, and the pods somewhat better filled 
tho no larger. From neither lot of seed were the crops more than 
fair. 

The English descriptions prove this a pea varying 
quite widely in height, and in later trials at the Royal 
Horticultural Society gardens it was not considered 
worthy an Award of Merit which it received in its early 
days. 

Profusion. Refs. 77; Burpee Cat. 1891. Arnold 
originated this pea, and Burpee introduced it in 1891, 
after previous preliminary distribution of packets for 
testing. It soon became widely known and considerably 
grown in America and also, to some extent, in France. 
The Profusion peas listed in England, however, are 
probably not Arnold's. It was grown at this Station 
in 1890 and 1893, but only brief notes on it are recorded. 
It was also grown here during three recent seasons, from 
the introducer's seeds. 

Height, 2]4 to 2}^ feet; stem stout, support unnecessary, 
branched sparingly, both at the base and above; foliage abundant, 
medium green with rather small leaflets and stipules, scarcely if at all 
whitened; flowers from about the 14th node; pods single and paired, 
3 to 3} 2 inches long, moderately broad, quite plump, straight and 
well filled to the rounded or blunt, small-tipped ends; rather light 
in color; peas 4 to 7, whitish or light green, large, indented, oblong, 
of good quality. The crops began after midseason and could be 
rated only as good. 

Prestige. Refs. 79; Boddington Cat. 1913. As 
Prolific Late Marrow, under which name it was sent to 
the Royal Horticultural Society for testing in 1901 by 
Jas. Veitch, Prestige received an Award of Merit It 
was listed in America in 1913, but appears never to have 
been widely grown. 



Seed of it was received here from McMillan, Mich., 
where it had been grown on the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture plats, with the note by Dr. D. N. Shoe- 
maker that it appeared identical with Royal Salute; 
and the differences discoverable by comparison of the 
checked record sheets were less between this and two 
of the strains of Royal Salute than between these two 
and a third strain of that variety. The two varieties 
are probably not identical, but so similar that only most 
careful comparison of the two grown side by side from 
true-strain stocks could separate them. Seeds of Pres- 
tige were decidedly more green; but crop seeds of one 
strain of Royal Salute were also practically all green. 
For description, see Royal Salute, which follows. 

Royal Salute. Refs. 80; Dickson (2) Cat. 1923; 
Burpee Cat. 1911. Royal Salute originated with 
Dickson (2) before 1902, and received an Award of 
Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1916 
but was denied one in 1922. It reached the United 
States in 1911, and has been considerably grown. Three 
strains of it were tested here recently, which differed 
quite widely in size and color of seeds and in size of pods 
but were sufficiently alike in other points to be considered 
as of one variety, particularly as much of the difference 
on some points disappeared in second crops grown from 
seed of the first year. 

Height 2 1 4 to 3 feet; stem stout, sparingly branched at the 
base, foliage abundant to dense, medium to dark green with little 
bloom or little whitening of the four large to medium leaflets but 
much bloom on the whitened, sharp-tipped stipules; pods single or 
occasionally paired from the 14th node, on long, thick stalks, vary- 
ing greatly in size from 3 ;1 s to 3 7 s inches for one strain to 3 3 4 to 
5 inches for another, with the third strain intermediate between the 
others, straight, sometimes irregular or very slightly curved, with 
rounded ends, rather broad, plump, but not usually filled quite to 
the edge; peas 4 to 6 or 5 to 8, large, round or indented and some- 
what oval or oblong, dark green, rather better in color than the 
outside of the pods would indicate, of good but nor the best quality; 
seeds from medium in size to very large, moderately wrinkled, vary- 
ing in color as noted under Prestige. It was late, requiring about 
ten weeks for the first pods even when sown very late. 

Champion of Scotland. Refs. 81, 82; Amer. 
Agr. 18:174. 1861; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:100. 

1873. Champion of Scotland appears to be a pea of the 
Ward Incomparable, British Queen, Fairbeard Nonpareil 
or Knight Tall White Marrow type, considered when 
introduced as superior to Champion of England but 
white seeded. Hogg considered it identical with Hay 
Mammoth, which has many synonyms, including some 
which connect it with British Queen. It is credited to 
Lawson, who advertised it in 1859. It reached the 
United States almost immediately, but in 1889 was 
held to be synonymous with British Queen. Scotch 
Champion (p. 107) can hardly be a synonym. It must 
have desirable qualities to hold a place as late as 1889; 
and it is still available, as seed was sent here from the 
U. S. Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, 
Mich., and grown in 1926. 

As usual with English peas, it was much shorter on our soil, 
reaching only 3 feet; unsupported vines drooped or trailed but the 
tips of the enlarged stems grew quite erect, giving a peculiar appear- 
ance to the variety, the stems showing plainly thru the rather scanty 



56 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



medium green foliage: flowers begin at the 14th node, on long, 

slender stalks and oi>en widely making them very prominent i pods 

single, or rarely paired, about 3 inches long, slender but plump, 

n, straight or vers gently curved for their 

full length, very well tilled to the square ends with large tips, light 

green peas average almost 8 to the pod. very uniform, 

im in sire, much compressed and indented, oval from hilum 

whitish green in ding color very well in cooking, 

only fair in quality, with little sweetness; seeds correspond to the 

peas in shape, are heavily wTinkled. and show a very faint bluish 

shade over the light cream color. The variety is late and matures 

slowly, the entire crop being only fair to good. 

Prince of Wales. Refs. 85; Hogg Gard. Yr. 
Bk. 14:97. 1873; Rural N. Y. 1:5:737. 1884. Great 
confusion exists in pea literature in regard to Princess, 
Princesse. Princess Royal. Princess of Wales and Prince 
of Wales; but the relationships are probably about as 
follows: An old Prince of Wales, credited to Hurlstone, 
was introduced before 1846 and more or less grown for 
a decade. It is noticed under the Extra Early group, 
being apparently a good type of Early Frame. Princess 
was probably an erroneous American synonym for this 
pea; as neither Princess Royal nor Princess of Wales 
could very well have reached America when Princess 
was listed in 1861 as an " extra early." Princess Royal, 
a McLean pea, was introduced about 1860, was of the 
American Marrow type, and is described in that group. 
Sutton's Princess of Wales was a green wrinkled pea, 
much like Advancer, introduced about 1864. It is dis- 
cussed on p. 104. 

The Prince of Wales here described originated with 
Dr. McLean previous to 1865 as a cross between Beck 
Gem and some good marrow pea. He sold the stock 
to Turner and the latter placed it in commerce thru 
various seedsmen, including Sutton, so it is frequently 
known as Sutton's Prince of Wales. Hogg says Prince 
of Wales was a finely selected stock of Alliance, later 
and with better filled pods; but this statement may be 
based on external resemblance only, without a definite 
knowledge as to history. It was introduced into Amer- 
ica about 1884 and has since been widely grown both in 
gardens and as a canners' pea. Two strains of it have 
been grown here in our tests, and an additional one on 
our canning pea plats. Only slight differences in the 
strains were noticed, these being largely variations in 
size of seeds and peas, but one strain was distinctly, tho 
very slightly, earlier than the other two strains grown 
beside it. One strain was exceptionally susceptible to 
root -rot. 

Height about 3 feet, support desirable in row culture but the 
tips of the vines grow erect in the field so that the pods, starting 
above the 13th node, are readily harvested: foliage medium green, 
abundant to dense, not specially characteristic; pods often paired, 
from 3 to 3 ' 4 inches long, medium in width and plumpness, 
straight, hardly well filled, light in color, peas about 5, large, 

smooth, oval-oblong, whitish green or light green, of good 
quality: seeds cream -colored, usually with some distinctly shaded 
light green, very large, round oval or oblong, coarsely wrinkled. 

i late pea. requiring 70 days to first filled pods in the gar- 

;o canning maturity, gives heavy crops in long, moist 

« r« on« . but suffers when hot weather sets in before the pods have 

begun to fill as happens frequently with a variety so late in 

mat'-- 



TALL PEAS 
lla\ Mammoth. Ref. 73. Hogg in 1873 said: 
" We have known this variety of pea for the last thirty- 
five years; and we cannot tell how long it had existed 
before that," but gives its history as having been first 
obtained by Anderson, from a small gardener in Batter- 
sea Fields. About 1873 it appeared as Ward Incom- 
parable and was sold for a high price, and ten years later 
under the name Will Watch it brought two or three times 
its cost as Mammoth. 

According to Hogg: Height 6 to 7 feet, very strong and 
vigorous, with three or four lateral branches when thinly sown, as 
long and productive as the main stem; pods produced in succession 
over a long season, generally in pairs, sometimes single, 3 , to 4 ' , 
inches long, quite broad, somewhat curved, blunt -ended with small 
tip, bright green in color; peas about 7, of delicious flavor, over half 
an inch long, nearly as wide and almost as thick as wide; seeds white, 
wrinkled. It was a most abundant bearer and latest of the marrows. 

Fairbeard Nonpareil. Refs. 87; Burr Fid. Card. 
Veg. 537. 1863. Fairbeard Nonpareil has had a 
long life, as it originated previous to 1853, was listed in 
England at least as late as 1923, and was grown here in 
1926, from seed produced on the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture plats. In 1853 Fairbeard announced the 
intended sending out of Non Pareil that season, and it 
was advertised as new the following year by Sutton. 
It has a continuous record since that time, either in 
England or on the continent, but was probably never 
widely grown in America, altho described by Burr. 

In our test: Height 3'i feet; stems slender, occasionally 
branched at the base; foliage medium in amount and color, with 
4 to 6 small leaflets and much larger, round-tipped stipules, neither 
whitened, but both glaucous, the stipules decidedly so; flowers small, 
appearing ruffled thru folded edges of the wing petals, from 13th 
node, either single or paired on very long, slender stalks; pods very 
uniform, short, 2}> to 2"* inches or occasionally even shorter, 
narrow, or slender, but plump, straight or very slightly curved, 
very well filled to the square ends which have comparatively large 
tips, light green in color; peas averaging nearly 6, medium to small 
in size, smooth-surfaced, indented in the best filled pods, oval from 
hilum to tip, and light green in color; seeds indistinguishable from 
those of Champion of Scotland and British Queen. It is a taller 
pea than the former and rather earlier in season than the latter, 
coming in midseason, and still, tho past " three score years and 
ten," giving very good crops. 

KNIGHT MARROWS 
Although wrinkled peas existed before his time, 
Thomas Andrew Knight gave to the world the first group 
of named varieties of this type previous to 1828. The 
history of Knight's experiments with peas is given 
under the general history of peas (p. 8), and it is only 
necessary to say here that the Knight Marrow described 
below is probably the second of the six or more varieties 
he segregated: Tall and Dwarf, — White, Blue and 
Green, — Wrinkled Marrows. His Dwarf Marrow, with 
cream -colored seeds was first offered in America by 
Thorburn in 1828, so has been in existence over a century 
and known in this country for nearly that. It is no 
longer listed here; but seed of Knight Marrow from 
Holland came to this Station through the Minnesota 
Station in 1923; while Jenny Lind, regarded as a synonym, 
probably of the Tall White Marrow, was grown here in 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



57 



1924 and 1925 from German raised seed. The two 
varieties differ only in height and season, the Knight 
(Dwarf?) Marrow being 3 to 3 1 •_> feet, and ready in mid- 
season, Jenny Lind being 1 ' ■_> to 2 feet taller, and very 
late. Pods and peas of both are practically indis- 
tinguishable from those of Fairbeard Nonpareil. Jenny 
Lind was too late to produce well, the hot midsummer 
weather shortening production. It should be said that 
the Knight Marrow grown here recently was nearly 
twice as tall as Knight Dwarf Marrow described in 
the Station Annual Report for 1884, and the present- 
day pods were more square at the end and better filled 
with smaller peas than those grown 40 years ago. 
Neither then nor now were the crops as good as those 
recently secured from Fairbeard Nonpareil, though the 
differences may have been purely seasonal, since the 
Nonpareil was grown only in 1926. 

Queen of the Marrows. Refs. 88; Hogg Gard. 
Yr. Bk. H:96. 1873. This pea, offered by McMillan 
in 1868, is unknown in America, unless, as claimed the 
next year, it is identical with Ne Plus Ultra, which has 
been grown here. Ne Plus Ultra, however, has many 
distinctly green seeds, some with green under color; 
while Queen of the Marrows was said to be a very tall 
" white, wrinkled marrow." Hogg says Queen of the 
Marrows is merely a synonym of British Queen. 

Earliest Marrow. Ref. 89. Veitch(l) introduced 
Earliest Marrow before 1907; but it is evidently not 
widely spread in England; and is unknown on this side 
of the Atlantic except as tested at the University of 
British Columbia and grown here from seed sent us by 
the University. With us it proved a midseason variety 
only, and too tall and too unproductive for popularity. 

Height nearly 4 feet; foliage light green, large, considerably 
whitened and with but little bloom; flowers low for so tall a stem, 
10th node; pods single only, 3 or 3J^ inches long, straight, quite 
broad, plump, fairly well filled, pointed, sometimes dorsally pointed 
also, of good, dark color, and fairly well filled; peas large, com- 
pressed, oval, well colored; seeds very large and distinctly oblong in 
shape. 

Lanjiport ( Ref. 90 ) originated with Kelway and was 
introduced in 1913. It has been known in America 
since 1920, and was grown here during three recent 

GEM 
This group might well bear the double name. Gem 
and Wonder; but for simplicity in reference the name of 
the older variety only is used. Two slightly different, 
but generally similar, types of pods characterize Little 
Gem, the old English variety, and American Wonder, 
the American one, to one of which most of the varieties 
of the group are related, directly or indirectly. 

Both of these varieties are described in some detail, 
with special attention to pod characters, and the other 
varieties, so far as possible, are related, by difference or 
resemblance, to either the Gem or the Wonder type. 
As with most groups of wrinkled peas, the history of the 
group begins with Little Gem, since this originated from 
a cross between varieties very different from the type. 
Little Gem. Refs. 1, 2; U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. 1865. 
Little Gem, first of the really good dwarf, wrinkled peas, 



seasons. Tho cream seeded, it shows dark green color 
in both foliage and pods, but the former is much 
whitened. 

Height 4 to 5 feet; stems stout, with a few medial branches; 
flowers at 14th node; pods single, as long as those of Alderman, 
rather broader, better colored and containing more peas. I It did 
better on the same soil than Alderman, the pod comparison being 
made with Alderman pods grown on richer soil.) The 5 to 8 peas 
are very large, smooth, round oval or oblong, and dark green. It is 
fully as early as Alderman, and when acclimated will undoubtedly 
be a better cropper. 

British Queen. Refs. 91 97; Amer. Gard. Mag. 
10:96. 1844; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:243. 1885. Two 
slightly variant accounts trace British Queen to the 
Jersey Islands. The reference of 1844, above, says it 
was grown by P. Le Fauvre in the island of Guernsey; 
the other ( Ref. 95 ) that peas found in some onions from 
Spain were sown and the progeny given to B. J. Saunders, 
Jersey, who propagated them and sold part of the crop 
to Lawson and part to Cormack, both lots under the 
name St. Peters Marrow, which Lawson changed to 
St. Heliers Marrow and Cormack to British Queen. 
Cormack advertised the pea in 1841, and it has been 
more or less continuously listed in England until 1913, at 
least, while seeds of it were secured, indirectly, from Hol- 
land, for testing at this Station in 1922. It was recorded 
in an American publication in 1844 and sold here in 
1845, but probably is no longer grown commercially. 

It is a taller pea than any of the group except Jenny Lind, 
previously described, reaching 5 feet, and is very late. The foliage 
is beyond medium green in color, but much whitened, comparatively 
free of glaucousness and large in both leaflets and stipules, the 
latter being very round in pair outline and blunt tipped, with few 
teeth; pods begin high on the basally branched stems, 22nd node, 
and are borne singly on long stalks, about 3 inches in length, of 
medium width and plumpness, slightly curved, poorly filled to the 
blunt or square ends which have small but noticeable tips, charac- 
teristically whitish green in color, with very smooth surfaces; 
peas 5 or 6, medium sized, round or oval, poorly colored. In our 
recent trials the seeds were small and much like those of several 
varieties previously described, but as grown here in 1884, they were 
much larger, about 75 to the ounce as compared with 120 now, 
much flattened and shriveled. The crops were also better then, 
the variety being called extremely prolific, while now it could be 
ranked only fair to good in productivity. It was said to be little 
affected by mildew, an essential point for late peas in most seasons. 

GROUP 
originated with Dr. McLean before 1862, when it was 
introduced by Turner. Like others of Dr. McLean's 
seedlings, this probably was a cross between Beck Gem 
and " one of the best wrinkled marrows." It became 
popular, not only in England, but in France, Holland, 
Germany and the United States, which last it reached 
in 1865 or 1866, and where it still is listed and grown, 
tho now less than some others of the group. 

Seeds small, about 130 to the ounce, finely wrinkled, oblong 
oval to almost circular from hilum to tip, flattened or indented, 
frequently like sections of a compressed cylinder, mostly light 
green to medium green, with a small percentage, varying with con- 
ditions, cream or bluish cream, with obscure radicles, and greenish 
cream to green cotyledons. 

Height, with us, 1 ' 4 to 1 J4 feet, with limits reported by others 
1 foot and 2}-> feet; stems stout, angular, smooth-surfaced, with 
short internodes, moderately branched near surface of ground and 



58 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Ac-nnt; n.-dr foliage abundant, rather dark green with 

whitish veins and whitened areas, most noticeable on the stipules; 

leaflets large, regular in shape, usually in -Is, almost bloomless, 

stipules only slightly larger than the leaflets, clasping the stem 

deeply, sharp-tipped, serrate to above the middle and distinctly 

glau* rs white, about the 8th node, only occasionally 

paired, on short, rather stocky peduncles; pods rarely paired. 

medium green in color, quite uniform. 2* . to 3 inches long within 

vfakh limits all figures given by others f.ill . quite broad, plump. 

having a cross section Ix-twcen round and oval, quite regular in 

!. surfaced, and usually well filled, both to the edge 

and to the end. which is rounded and bears a rather large prolongs 

frequently ending in a slender, curved point; peas 4 to 

6. occasionally 7. rather irregular, medium sized, round or oblong, 

rcssed or indented, medium green, of very good quality. 

The season is early or very early for wrinkled peas, the first 

!<ing ready in 5-' to 56 days from late sowings or 57 to 60 

days from sowings made as soon as is advisable for wrinkled peas. 

The pickings extend over nearly two weeks. In recent years, at 

least. Little Gem has not been very productive, the crops ranking 

as only fair to good. 

American Wonder. Refs. 4, 5; Card. Chron. 
IK:507. 1882; Denaiffc L. P. P. 39. 1906. American 
Wonder originated about 1875 or 1876 with Arnold as 
a Little Gem x Champion of England cross, and was 
introduced by Bliss in 1878. This was the first real 
competitor of Little Gem, which had held the field for 
15 years: but American Wonder became fully as popular, 
if not more so. It reached Australia in two years, Eng- 
land in three, and like Little Gem. soon found a place in 
most if not all Continental pea-growing countries. It 
is probably the most widely known American pea. Its 
earliness, small size, prolificness and fine quality gave 
it a place in the garden of practically every American 
pea lover ; and the forceful advertising of its introducers 
brought it to the attention of foreign growers, who soon 
recognized its merits. 

Seeds slightly larger than those of Little Gem, more nearly 
round from hilum to tip. rather thicker, with more of the " cylinder- 
section " appearance, and usually with a slightly greater percentage 
I f the cream-colored type, more blue ior white in the green of the 
skin, and more cream in the cotyledon color; plants more dwarf, 
3 1 to 1 foot tall in our tests, with others' limits, } ■> foot and 1 ' 4 feet; 
stems stout, only slightly angled, internodes correspondingly shorter; 
branches rather fewer; foliage somewhat finer than that of Little 
Gem. and so clustered by the short internodes that stems and pod 
stalks are almost hidden, of the same color but slightly less whitened; 
with smaller leaflets and stipules, the latter being more often rounded 
at the tip One observer says leaves are borne mainly on one side 
of the stalk, but this peculiarity was not noticeable on our stock. 
The flowers do not differ from those of Little Gem, but are borne, 
singly, starting at about the 6th node; pods medium green in color, 
uniform, slightly shorter than those of Little Gem, scant 3 inches, 
with us and as noted by others' somewhat broader, giving a dis- 
tinctly short, plump, " stocky " appearance, almost cylindrical, 
with blunt ends, and short, straight tips, quite unlike those of 
Gem, exceptionally well filled, averaging one pea more than Little 
Gem; peas S to 7, occasionally 8. larger because of the greater 
breadth and plumpness of the pods, but equally indented, rather 
better in color. The season is slightly earlier than that of Little 
Gem, rather shorter, and the yield much better. 

The French improvement on this variety, American 
der Long-pod. was distinctly taller in plant and with 
pods often in pairs, of the same length as the original, 
or when single possibly a quarter of an inch longer. 

Premium Gem. Refs. 7 11. The exact date of 
origination of Premium Gem is uncertain ; but it was 



probably very shortly before 1877. when the variety was 
mentioned in an American periodical, in a note apparently 
copied from an English source. It was introduced by 
Carter and seems to be a selection from Little Gem 
without crossing. It is very like Little Gem, rather 
taller, reaching 2 feet, with pods longer by one-eighth of 
an inch, and somewhat better filled with slightly larger 
peas. Pickings begin at the same time but continue 
rather longer and the crops are decidedly better. Extra 
Early Premium Gem was considered merely a synonym 
in the early history of the variety; but in our tests the 
strain bearing that name was about two days earlier, 
coming with American Wonder, and a rather better 
producer. 

Another strain is Darling Gem. which, being grown 
farther north, is taller, occasionally has 6 leaflets, flowers 
at 11th node, has longer, slenderer, more blunt-ended 
pods, occasionally slightly curved at the tip, often with 
one more pea to the pod, but of poorer color; is later 
and hardly as good a producer under our central New 
York conditions. Magnificent, of the Berry Seed Co., 
Clarinda, Iowa, is a rather large-podded, productive 
strain of Premium Gem. 

William Hurst. Refs. 12 14; Gard. Mo. 26:112. 
1884. William Hurst was listed by Hurst in 1882, 
presumably on its introduction. It probably originated 
with Laxton. It resembles American Wonder and may 
be a selection from that variety, tho some plant characters 
are more like those of Little Gem. 

As grown at this Station in 1884 it was fully as 
dwarf as American Wonder, rarely branched, with lighter 
colored foliage and smaller leaflets, stipules more 
whitened, with pods less uniform in size, often small, 
and frequently curved toward the tips. It was very 
prolific, rather early and ripened slowly. 

Seeds for our recent tests came from Holland, were much 
smaller than those of American Wonder, as were the peas, better 
green with only slight admixture of cream seeds, and almost as finely 
wrinkled as Premium Gem. The plants were taller than those of 
American Wonder, and straggling like those of Little Gem, as was 
also noted by some other authorities. As in the older tests there 
were many small pods, especially when paired, as they were quite 
often, being, in this respect, like Little Gem, or better. The pods 
were of the broad, round-ended American Wonder type, differing 
from those described by Goff. They were borne on the 7th or 
8th nodes, were well filled, and produced abundantly over a long 
season, as in 1884, making very good crops. The small peas were 
crowded in the pod, showed wrinkling while still edible, were of 
light, shining, medium green to light green color and splendid quality. 
It appears to be one of the best of the older varieties of the group, 
and is still listed and grown. It is later than either Gem or Wonder. 

Station. Refs. 15; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:236. 1885; 
Gregory Car. 1895; Thorburn Car. 1895. The Sta- 
tion pea resulted from a cross between American Wonder 
and Earliest of All, made at this Station in 1883 by 
Prof. E. S. Goff. 

It preceded Gregory Surprise by several years, but 
the two varieties were almost inseparable, the later one 
was better advertised and the name Surprise won for 
the merged stock of the two, Station becoming obso- 
lete or only a synonym. True stock of it no longer 
exists. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



59 



Comparison with the Gem varieties will be found 
under Surprise; but according to early authorities, 
definite, slight differences separated Station and Sur- 
prise. Both foliage and pods of Surprise were some- 
what darker green than those of Station; its pods were 
wider in proportion to length, longer necked and ven- 
trally curved while the sides of Station pods were parallel ; 
and the peas of Surprise were crowded giving them a 
" shouldered," or cylinder-section appearance like that 
of the Gem peas. Surprise was also considered the 
better bearer of the two. 

English Wonder. Refs. 36; Gard. Chron. 13: 
716. 1893; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:5. 1905. English 
Wonder was raised by a gardener named Tipping, 
Kenilworth, Eng.. and introduced about 1891 by Cannell. 
It was brought to America by the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture for its tests in 1904 and introduced com- 
mercially shortly afterward. It is probably a selec- 
tion from American Wonder, or from a cross with it. 

As grown here the plants are considerably taller, about 1J4 
feet; with rather more angular stems; rather lighter colored foliage, 
having leaflets more often in 6s, and sharp-tipped, rather than round- 
tipped, stipules clasping the stem more deeply; with less conspicu- 
ous tendrils; blossoming much higher on the stem, 12th rather than 
6th node, with pods more often paired, rather longer and more 
uniform, slightly more slender, not quite so blunt-ended, smoothe/- 
surfaced and darker colored, and occasionally with one more pea 
to the pod, 7 instead of 6. The peas are slightly larger, and the 
seeds decidedly larger than those of American Wonder, but of the 
same general character, moderately wrinkled, and cream and 
light green in color. It was about three days later than American 
Wonder and not quite as good a bearer, tho giving very good crops. 
Aside from productivity, it seems better than the older variety; 
and some others have found it more productive. 

Recent reports indicate that in England stocks of 
English Wonder are much mixed with seeds producing 
peas like American Wonder. 

Nott Excelsior. Ref. 37. This pea originated 
with Richard Nott, Burlington, Vt., as an American 
Wonder x Advancer cross; and was introduced by 
Gregory in 1891. 

On Station soils it has been as tall or taller than 
Little Gem, l l 2 to 1 3 4 ' feet, tho generally said to be 
intermediate in height between Gem and Wonder. It 
is usually compared with Premium Gem and Little 
Marvel, but for sake of uniformity, we note its variance 
from Little Gem, as grown with it in our tests. 

The plants are rather more erect than Gem, tho still tending 
to droop; have some branches, usually basal; foliage similar but 
with broader leaflets and less clasping stipules, both decidedly 
whitened but with the white veins less noticeable; flowers from about 
the same node, or one higher, 9th, rarely paired; pods very similar 
to those of Little Gem, occasionally slightly longer, but averaging 
rather shorter, 2}/^ to 2 1 i inches, more often somewhat curved, 
with slightly more pointed ends, better colored, and averaging better 
filled; larger peas; seeds somewhat lighter in weight than those of 
Little Gem, oblong, indented or almost square in shape, and lighter 
in color, being greenish cream, with similar cotyledon color. With 
us it was slightly later than Little Gem, but somewhat more 
productive. 

It is usually said to be earlier than Gem or Wonder, 
more productive and more resistant to climatic extremes. 

Surprise. Refs. 42-44. Surprise originated with 
Horsford about 1889, from a cross similar to that which 



produced Station six years before, Earliest of All x 
American Wonder. After eight years of selection to 
secure plants producing the best filled pods and most 
wrinkled peas, Horsford disposed of the stock to Gregory, 
who introduced it in 1897. The non-identity of Station 
and Surprise is discussed under Station. 

The plants of Surprise are like those of Alaska and Extra Early, 
being taller than those of Little Gem, 2 ! 4 to 2^ feet, rarely with a 
medial branch; foliage scanty, slightly darker than medium green, 
considerably whitened, with rather long leaflets and sharp-tipped 
stipules only slightly larger than the adjoining leaflets and rather 
deeply clasping; pods borne singly from about the 8th node up, on 
rather slender stalks of moderate length, rarely reach 3 inches, 
almost round in section, plump, blunt to square at the ends, with 
small, straight tips; peas when in well grown pods ias they seldom 
have been here i, average 5 or 6, small to medium sized, rather oblong, 
indented or almost square, medium green in color and of very good 
quality; seeds small in most strains, 160 to 180 to the ounce, but 
may occasionally run as large as 140 to the ounce. Surprise is 
very early, requiring only 7 weeks to maturity when sown late, or 
l x /l to 8 weeks when sown in late April or early May on heavy soil 
near Geneva. It is one of the earliest wrinkled peas, often used for 
canning. Were its productivity equal to its other good qualities 
it would be very extensively grown; and some heavy -yielding 
strains have been developed. Unfortunately its yields are variable, 
and often only good or below; and it is only moderately resistant 
to pea diseases. 

William Wonder. Refs. 40: S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 
85:5. 1904. Witham Wonder originated with Cooper- 
Taber, possibly as a selection from English Wonder, 
from which it differs mainly in having curved pods. It 
was introduced about 1895, was brought to America 
for U. S. Department of Agriculture tests in 1903 and 
introduced commercially about five years later. It was 
grown here in recent tests from seed from the Idaho 
Station and from Holland. The seeds of the two 
strains differed somewhat, those from Holland being 
larger, more wrinkled and better green, but these dif- 
ferences disappeared in crop seeds of the first season ; 
and plants of the two strains were similar. 

Seeds, even of the Holland strain, were smaller than those of 
English Wonder and better green in color; plants about half a 
foot taller, 1 3 4 feet, similarly branched, with darker, more dense 
foliage, very free flowering from 8th node up, with pods on longer, 
rigid stalks, frequently paired, longer, sometimes 3 3 y inches, usually 
2 3 4 to 3's, much curved, rather more pointed but generally with 
long-rounded ends, not always quite as well filled, but averaging 
more peas to the pod, 6 to 7 as compared with 4 to 7. The peas 
are decidedly smaller, about 80 to the ounce as compared with 55, 
indented or flattened by crowding, wrinkling early, not as well 
colored, but of excellent quality. Withm Wonder is about three 
days earlier than English Wonder, but rather later than Little Gem. 
very productive and picking over a long period. 

Little Marvel. Refs. 45; Gregory Cat. 1911. 
Whether the Little Marvel grown in America is Sutton's 
pea of that name, or Carter's, if these are not the same, 
is unknown. 

Sutton's Little Marvel was introduced in 1900 and 
the Little Marvel we have did not reach America until 
1908, when Gregory received such a pea from Carter. 
Its parentage is given as Wm. Hurst x Daisy. From 
1911 to the present time Little Marvel has been widely 
grown in America, and both before and since that time 
has been frequently commended in English publications, 



60 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



receiving two or more Awards of Merit from the Royal I 
Horticultural Soc 

two here it is from 1 j _• to 1 ' i feet tall, like Little Gem 

in stem and branches but rather more erect, with rather smaller 

leaflets only slightly whitened and with stipules clasping the stem 

light! B«nt tendrils, flowers large, from near the 

groun 3rd node; pods paired as well as single, on short. 

thick stalks, pods almost identical with those of Little Gem. shorter 

when paired, heavier, and with longer, pointed ends and the typical 

irve.l tips of Little Gem; much darker in color than those of 

Gem; peas somewhat larger: seeds much larger, even exceeding 

Vncrican Wonder, but much more wrinkled. It should 

be said that Sutton's and Carter's illustrations of Little Marvel 

" stockier " pods with blunter ends than we have been able 

to secure in our tests; and some American descriptions make the 

pods blunt ended. The pea has been almost as early as American 

-r. and exceedingly productive. Little Marvel is among the 

f the peas of this group. Laxton's Little Marvel Improved 

i Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. .">2:lo7 19J7 j s a mixed stock, with 

broader podded and curved-podded types. 

Rivenhall Wonder. Refs. 48; Maule Cat. 1905. 
Rivenhall Wonder received an Award of Merit from the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1903, when sent by 
Cooper -Taber and seed of it was secured for American 
distribution in 1905 when it was probably first sold in 
England. It is said by various authorities to be " of 
the Gem class," " an improved American Wonder," 
and " an improved Witham Wonder." As Witham 
Wonder was also a Cooper-Taber pea, Rivenhall Wonder 
is probably a selection from it. Seed of it sent here 
from British Columbia gave a very poor stand, so 
original plant descriptions were not secured. 

In England. Height 2} ■> feet; stem very robust, dark green; 
foliage and pods dark green. In America " 10 inches tall " or " 4 
to 5 inches taller than American Wonder," with short internodes 
and dense foliage. 

As we grew them, pods 3 to 3 3 , inches long, broad, moderately 
plump, straight, with long-rounded ends without tips, medium to 
deep green in color, not always well filled; peas averaged 5 or 6, 
large, light green, seeds of British Wonder type but more compressed 
and thinner, making them weigh one-tenth less, much larger than 
those of Witham Wonder, and more wrinkled than those of American 
Wonder. It is decidedly later than most of the class, a midseason 
or even late midseason variety, but said to be very productive. 

Karlv Excelsior. Ref. 50. Excelsior, or Early 
Excelsior, as Gregory named it in 1906, is undoubtedly 
an English pea, as the introducer compares it with Nott 
Excelsior, " its American cousin; " but we have been 
unable to ascertain its English source. It is not Sutton 
Excelsior. We have grown Excelsior from British 
Columbia seeds and Early Excelsior from the introducer's 
stock, and find them essentially identical. 

The variety is like Nott Excelsior, but earlier, 47 to 50 days 
from late May sowing, or 36 days from earlier planting: with larger 
pods and peas, 3 to 3 ' ( inches instead of 2 ' j to 2 ' ., and 45 to the 
ounce rather than 70. with stouter vines 3 t to 1 foot tall: and a better 
producer giving better than good and very good crops. The seeds 

LARGE PODDED 
This group of garden peas is of comparatively recent 
origin. The oldest varieties in it, and these not quite 
typical of the group, are less than 50 years old; and 
more than three-fourths of all have originated during 
this century, in response to the modern demand for 
the combination in single varieties of all desirable pea 



weigh 105 to the ounce. 30 less than Nott Excelsior, and are very 
similar in color and shape to those of British Wonder. 

Richard Seddon. Refs. 54; and letter of J. A. 
Campbell, Director of Horticulture, N. Z. Department of 
Agr., May 18, 1926. Richard Seddon originated with 
F. Cooper, Wellington, N. Z., about 1912 and was named 
for the representative there of the British Government. 
It appeared in several American catalogs in 1913, and 
was at one time in considerable favor here and in Canada. 

As grown here, of Little Gem type of branches and foliage, 
with a stouter, less angular stem 1 1', feet tall, flowering at the 
7th node and producing single pods on short, stocky stalks, of 
Wonder, rather than Gem type. 2"* to 3' | inches long, but uneven, 
with many small pods only 2 ' _> inches long, slightly curved, with 
pointed to rounded ends and distinct straight tips, wrinkling early, 
not always well filled, but when perfect with 6 to 8 medium sized, 
oblong, indented peas, dark green in color and of fine quality. 
The seeds are of Gem type, but remarkable for the " cylinder 
section " appearance. The variety was fully midseason in maturing 
pods, and not productive. It is evident that marked strain dif- 
ferences exist, as some, particularly the originator, found it as early 
as American Wonder, others a few days later than the Gems. 

Duke Delighl iRef. 56) was introduced by Rout- 
ledge in 1918, coming originally from New Zealand. It 
was named for one of the firm whose " nickname " was 
" Duke." It is very similar to American Wonder, not 
quite as early but maturing more uniformly. It was 
the most productive pea, for the size of the plants, of 
any in the group; and one of the best table peas in color 
and quality. 

It varies somewhat in height, from 5 6 to 1 ' .[ feet, these limits 
being noted in different seasons; flowers from the 7th or 8th 
node, and bears both single and paired pods. These varied, in the 
two seasons, 2 ;i ,to3', inches long in 1926, 2", to 3 ' , in 1924, but 
were uniform in each season, very plump or " stocky," occasionally 
saddle-backed, straight, blunt to square at the end with a small, 
straight tip, slightly wrinkled when ready to pick, good green in 
color, and averaging 6 or 7 very large, oval, indented dark green 
peas of the best quality. The seeds are practically those of Little 
Gem enlarged one-fifth and noticeably of " cylinder section " shape 
from compression in the pod. 

Canners' Gem (Ref. 57) originated with Allan 
probably about 1920. 

It isof Little Gem type of stem, considerably taller, 2'. i to 2 ' 2 
feet, with strong basal branches; foliage less whitened, sometimes 
with 6 leaflets, and with more round-tipped stipules; tendrils are quite 
prominent, long and slender: flowers begin well up the stem, 14th 
node: pods borne toward top of plants, in pairs and singly, on long, 
quite heavy stalks, much longer than those of Little Gem, 2 ' s to 
3 ' j inches, appear more slender but are plump, perfectly straight 
and with parallel sides, blunt at the ends and with small straight 
tips, more like Wonder than Gem in these last characteristics, light 
green in color, almost always well filled; peas 5 8, small or medium 
sized, oval, indented, light green to medium green, of fine quality; 
seeds smaller than those of Little Gem and often of decided cylinder 
section shape. The season is later than that of Little Gem and the 
yield not high, but it grades well for canning. It is not a good gar- 
den variety, because of the poor distribution of pods and short season. 

DWARF GROUP 

qualities: Ease and economy of handling in both cultiva- 
tion and picking; heavy yields; early and continuous 
production; or, for canning peas, nearly simultaneous 
readiness of most of the crop; large, attractive and well- 
filled pods; and peas of the highest quality. 

The varieties of the group have resulted from crosses; 




A plump-podded type 



DUKE DELIGHT 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




CANNERS' GEM 



(Two-thirds natural -iz'j.i 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



61 



but unfortunately modern breeders, unless with decidedly 
scientific leanings, have not generally given the parentage 
of the varieties originated; and the histories in this 
group are more lacking in accurate breeding data than 
those in many other groups. With innumerable varieties 
to work with, each showing many characteristics, and 
few of them purified from Mendelian recessives, several 
combinations of parents, of the comparatively few known, 
have appeared quite unlike in character groupings, yet 
have resulted in new varieties sufficiently alike to come 
well within the limits of the group, and in some cases 
to be very similar. This diversity in parentage, known 
and unknown, makes any genetic grouping of the vari- 
eties impossible; so that the group, in its three sections, 
is merely a collection of varieties similar in general 
appearance and horticulturally useful characteristics, 
all having wrinkled seeds, usually mixed in color. The 
first section includes the comparatively low-growing, 
semi-dwarf or dwarf types, with pods above medium in 
length, generally straight, but occasionally slightly 
curved, broad, seldom very plump, and with ends long 
rounded or pointed, having small tips or none. The 
pods are quite similar to those of the Telephone group, 
usually shorter and relatively broader, but in a few 
sorts, longer and appearing more slender. The second 
section is very similar to the first, but with pods rounded, 
blunt or square at the ends, usually with distinct tips, 
and often more plump than those of the first group. 
The third section is separated from the others by vine 
characters mainly, being decidedly more dwarf in early 
stages and showing a " bunchy " or clustered appearance 
due to the slow lengthening of the upper internodes 
before flowering which masses the rather heavy foliage 
and developing pods at the top of the stem. 

Of the first group, Dwarf Telephone (incorrectly 
used as a synonym of Daisy), World Record, Lax- 
tonian, and Peter Pan, are among the best known, and 
are described in detail, the characters of the others 
being indicated more briefly as showing differences or 
resemblances of these varieties to one or the other of 
those more fully described. 

POINTED POD SECTION 

Dwarf Telephone. Refs. 6-10. The true Dwarf 
Telephone originated in 1888 from a Stratagem x Tele- 
phone cross, made " by one of the most careful propa- 
gators in the United States," apparently not a member 
of the Allan firm, by whom it was introduced. Later 
the cross was said to be between Improved Stratagem 
and Improved Telephone. Carter Daisy is usually 
regarded as identical with Dwarf Telephone, but the two 
varieties originated on opposite sides of the Atlantic 
in different years and from different parentage. Strata- 
gem was common to the two, but the other parent of 
Dwarf Telephone was Telephone; and of Daisy, a seed- 
ling from a second Stratagem cross. The seeds of Dwarf 
Telephone are mixed cream and green, those of Daisy 
clear dark cream, with an almost brownish shade. 

As grown here Dwarf Telephone was 2*4 feet tall; stems 
moderately stout, internodes short, making support unnecessary, 



but allowing the upper part of the plants to droop or trail; usually 
branched both at the base and near the middle of the stalk; foliage 
abundant, medium green, not whitened nor noticeably glaucous, 
made up of small, regular leaflets in 4s and stipules only slightly 
larger than the leaflets, lightly clasping the stem, sharp-tipped and 
with shallow teeth to above the middle. The plants did not show 
the clustered effect of the upper leaves and buds so characteristic 
of Daisy. Pods began somewhat irregularly, from the 7th to the 
12th node, being lower on unbranched stems, almost always single 
with us, but occasionally paired elsewhere, 3} 4 to 3 3 4 inches long, 
in other tests 4 or 4}/2 inches, medium or greater in breadth, quite 
plump, oval in cross section, smooth or finely wrinkled at picking 
time, straight or slightly curved, with ventrum less arched than 
that of Daisy, filled to the tip and nearly to the edge, rounded to 
long rounded at the end, which bears a large, straight tip; only 
medium green in color and the walls rather too thin to hold fresh- 
ness well; peas 5 or 6, occasionally more, medium to large in size, 
quite uniform in the pod, smooth, round or slightly indented, oval 
to oblong vertically, between light green and medium green in 
color, of excellent quality. The season was decidedly earlier than 
that of Telephone; but the yield was not as good. 

Early Morn. Refs. 15, 16; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 
91:5. 1905; Dreer Cat. 1905. Early Morn was intro- 
duced by Carter in 1897, received an Award of Merit 
from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1899, was tested 
by the United States Department of Agriculture in 1904, 
and was commercially introduced in the United States 
the next year. It has been quite widely grown in 
England, and to some extent in this country. 

Early Morn was grown here from the introducer's 
seed and from American grown seed. The domestic 
strain was much inferior to that from English seed, so 
the description is based on the latter alone. 

Of Dwarf Telephone type, it was much taller, 3 feet ; stem much 
more slender making support necessary for best results, less branched; 
foliage less abundant, both leaflets and stipules considerably whitened 
or tinted with yellow, stipules larger than those of Dwarf Telephone, 
somewhat glaucous, very deeply clasping and rounded at the tips; 
tendrils less prominent; flowers cream colored, small and few in 
number at any particular time, borne singly, beginning at the 8th 
node; pods average shorter, more uneven in length, broader, 
straighter, not so well filled, and with more pointed ends, frequently 
showing a dorsal slant to the point, as well as ventral, light to 
medium green in color, with little bloom; peas slightly larger, more 
oblong, of rather poor color and with a tendency to wrinkling while 
at the picking stage, making it necessary to pick early before the 
pods were fully filled, if the quality is to be retained; seeds larger 
and more wrinkled, mixed cream and green. Crop ready a full 
week before that of Dwarf Telephone but yields only fair. 

World Record. Refs. 32; Leonard Cat. 1913. 
World Record originated with Sutton before 1907, when 
first listed, from a cross between Harbinger and Early 
Giant. It reached the United States in 1913 or earlier. 
It became quite well known in this country but is not 
now as popular as some other varieties of the group; 
since it seems somewhat irregular in behavior, succeeding 
well in some seasons or some localities and poorly in 
others. Tho grown from three seed sources and in 
different years at the Station, we succeeded in getting 
only one fairly representative crop; and even with this 
the pods were small. The description here given, there- 
fore, is to some extent compiled, especially with respect 
to dimensions. 

Height 2 '4 to 2J^ feet, occasionally more; stem short -jointed 
but rather slender, with occasional basal branches only; foliage 



62 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



scanty to medium, medium to light green, without bloom, consider- 
ably whitened, composed of small leaflets in 4s and of slightly larger, 
blunt tipped stipules, cut for about half the outer margin with small 
teeth, and clasping the stem lightly; tendrils inconspicuous: flow..-. 
began at the 7th or 8th node, white with a distinct bluish shade; 
slender stalks, broad, plump, round to oval in 
o, straight, somewhat wrinkled, light in color, pointed, some- 
tall) pointed also and without distinct tips, in our tists 
much shorter than as usually described. 2 1 . to 3 inches long, while 
English references give lengths as great as 6 inches, and other 

nches. Unless verj long, the plump- 
ness of the pods gives them a stocky or stubby appearance excep- 
tional in pointed ixhIs: and the long rounding of the ends makes 
them appear somewhat curved, peas 5 to 7. large, handsome, 
round to slightly indented, oval, light green in color, of excellent 
quality: seeds much larger and more wrinkled than those of Dwarf 
Telephone and largely cream colored. The crops were almost first 
early and when the pea was successful, better than good. 

Laxtonian. Refs. 37; Allen. Sterling 6s Lothrop 
Cat. 1913. Laxtonian was introduced by Laxton Bros, 
before 1907, and was brought to America six years 
later. It is becoming well known and very popular. 
Three strains of it were grown in our recent tests, and 
found to be satisfactorily uniform, the differences 
noticed being of little horticultural importance. 

Height 1 ' , to 1 ' j feet : stems stout, short-jointed, unbranched 
or occasionally branched both at base and above, erect or 
slightly drooping; foliage medium to abundant, rather dark 
with leaflets in 4s. noticeably variant in size, and stipules 
slightly glaucous and whitened, only slightly larger than the 
leaflets, round-tipped and serrate to about the middle; tendrils not 
prominent, usually rather slender and much curled; flowers white. 
of medium size, usually single but occasionally paired, beginning 
from 6th to 8th node, on long stalks when paired, of medium length 
when single, and rather slender; pods mostly 3 :i „ inches long, 
but occasionally only 3 inches, quite broad, moderately plump 
varying from round to broadly oval in section, straight or slightly 
curved toward the tips, occasionally somewhat depressed between 
the peas, with long-rounded or pointed ends, sometimes dorsally 
slanted to the ends, also, and with a distinct to small, straight or 
slightly recurved tip, and filled to the edges but not quite to the 
tips: peas average 5 or more, large, round or somewhat indented. 
oval to oblong, almost dark green, of splendid quality except for 
slightly tough skins: seeds not quite as large as those of World 
Record, about 105 to the ounce, about equally dark cream and light 
green in color, very well wrinkled. It is a second early variety, 
about with Little Marvel and Premium Gem and a few days to a 
week ahead of Gradus Prosperity and Thomas Laxton; and 
usually a good to very good producer. 

Pioneer Sutton Pioneer). Refs. 24, 25 of Wrinkled, 
Cream-Seeded group, 39; Gregory Cat. 1916. Of three 
English " marrowfat " Pioneer peas, Eckford's 5 feet high 
and introduced in 1906, Webb's, 3'j feet, introduced 
before 1912, and Sutton's, introduced in 1906, the latter, 
alone, seems to have been grown in the United States, 
which it reached in 1916. 

It is an improved type of Laxtonian, 1 ' i to 1 ' j feet 
tall, and unusually robust, with light green to medium 
green foliage and somewhat darker colored, long, very 
slightly curved pods, with long rounded to pointed ends, 
sometimes also dorsally pointed, and small or no tips. 
It is said to be similar to Peter Pan, but with rather 
narrower, less uniform pods; and to produce heavy crops. 

Disc ov er y . Refs. 40: Burpee Cat. 1915. Dis- 
covery was introduced by Sutton in 1910, and was 
brought to America in 1915. While in general habit 



somewhat like Laxtonian, it is much longer podded 
and somewhat later, being more like Sutton Superlative. 

Compared with Laxtonian, as both grew here, it is about 
iu thud taller, 2 ' ■_• feet; stem more slender, much enlarged above, 
drooping or almost trailing but succeeding fairly well without 
support, more often branched; foliage with bluish shade, glaucous 
but not whitened, consisting of large, broad leaflets in 4s and 6s, 
and very large, wrinkled, round-tipped, deeply clasping stipules, 
distinctly tinted bluish; tendrils large and prominent; flowers began 
higher, about the 12th node, borne singly on short, heavy stalks, 
pods massive, longer, 3 :1 4 to 4 i inches, broad, almost plump, 
showing considerable coarse wrinkling, straight, with rounded ends 
with a short, slightly dorsal slope to a small, but distinct slightly 
recurved tip. somewhat lighter in color than the foliage, usually 
well tilled to the tip. but not to the edge; peas 6 to 8, very large, 
smooth, oblong, dark green, of fine quality; seeds also very large, 
85 to 90 to the ounce, oblong, flattened, moderately wrinkled, and 
varying in color from almost pure deep cream as received from Idaho, 
to medium green with some bluish cream as furnished by an Ameri- 
can seedsman, or deep green to greenish cream, coming from England. 
Sown in late May, Discovery required nearly 9 weeks to produce 
marketable pods, or 10 weeks if sown two weeks earlier. It gave 
only good crops. 

Peter Pan. Refs. 42; Thorburn Cat. 1912. The 
first reference found to Peter Pan is in an American 
catalog in 1912; but it was apparently introduced in 
1910 by Watkins & Simpson, London, England, and 
received a Certificate from the Royal Horticultural 
Society in 1920. It has been much listed in the United 
States and is still extensively grown in home gardens 
and, to some extent for market, because of its good 
yield, fairly early, of beautiful large pods. 

As grown here: Height 1 ' £ to 1 \ feet; stem stout but slightly 
drooping, branches few, basal; foliage abundant, almost dark green, 
very much like that of Laxtonian in shape; flowers at 5th to 7th 
node, single, on rather short stalks; pods of about the same length 
as those of Laxtonian, 3'| to 4 inches, similarly wide and plump, 
but distinctly curved toward the point and without distinct tips; 
not filled quite as well in our tests, but equally well colored; peas 
very similar, noticeably long oblong, in each variety; seeds not 
quite as finely, tho fully, wrinkled. Peter Pan and Laxtonian arc 
the same in season, and the former a rather better producer. 

Blue Bantam iRefs. 44 47) was introduced by 
Burpee in 1912. 

It is so similar to Laxtonian in every way that 
descriptions of the two varieties, made independently, 
would not separate them. One comparison of them, 
made by a large grower of seed peas, makes Blue Ban- 
tam taller, a day later, and with pods a quarter of an 
inch longer than Laxtonian. Under our conditions, 
Blue Bantam was shorter than one strain of Laxtonian, 
taller than another, was one or three days earlier, and 
gave length measurements of 4 inches maximum, and 
3 1 -» to 3 : ''i inches for the run of a very even lot of pods, 
while the two lots of Laxtonian gave 3 1 ■> to 3" s inches 
for general run and 3 inches minimum for pods of one 
strain and 3 : ' % to 3" s inches, with the same minimum, 
for the other strain. The foliage of Blue Bantam showed 
some leaflets in 2s, and often with square tips. Only 
occasional basal branches were noted; but one strain 
of Laxtonian showed no branches, the other both basal 
and medial. 

If Blue Bantam and Laxtonian were originally dis- 
tinct, they have approached each other with age, or 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



63 



seed mixtures have occurred, so that purification of each 
variety would be necessary to re-establish the differences 
between them. 

Giant Laxtonian, with us, gave pod measurements of 
4 ' ( inches maximum length, ordinarily 3 :5 s to 3" s inches. 
It is essentially identical with one or both of the 
preceding. 

Marchioness (Ref. 53) originated with Sharpe and 
was announced in 1913. It reached America by 1918 
at latest, and has been considerably grown. Two 
strains of it were grown here, both justifying the descrip- 
tion " an early Gradus." 

In plant very similar to Early Morn, tho slightly shorter, 
2 3 4 feet, without medial branches and with rather larger leaflets 
and decidedly larger stipules, both light in color and decidedly 
whitened; flowers at the 8th or 9th node in each variety, but much 
whiter in Marchioness; pods single, on long, rather slender stalks, 
some slightly longer than those of Early Morn, but averaging the 
same for the general run, 3 to 3 3 s inches, of similar shape, but much 
lighter in color; peas in two strains were dark green; seeds of one 
strain nearly all light to medium green in color, but those from 
another source were nearly all dark cream. The two lots varied 
much in size, 83 and 126 to the ounce. 

Marchioness was quite early, coming between first 
and seconds, and was also very productive. Were it 
not for the rather light color of its pods and its height, 
Marchioness would be one of the best peas of this group. 

Harvester (Ref. 54) apparently originated with 
Ford, was sent out in small samples for trial in 1914, 
and regularly listed in 1915 by several firms. As grown 
here in recent tests it was mixed in type. 

In general dwarf, 1 3 4 to 2 feet, stout-stemmed, unbranched, 
with foliage of Blue Bantam type, but rather smaller leaflets; 
blossoming higher on the stem, 10th node, and with rather longer 
and plumper pods, more abrupt at the end and containing more 
and larger peas, usually indented by crowding; peas of fair color 
and quality only; seeds rather small, 125 to the ounce, somewhat 
coarsely wrinkled and mixed dark cream and light bluish green in 
color. It was a second early or early midseason variety and gave 
rather better than good yields. 

Progress (Ref. 58) originated with Laxton Bros, 
and was introduced in 1922. It reached the United 
States in 1924 and is already gaining popularity. It 
promises to be, even for America, one of the best of this 
group; as it is early, dwarf, productive, and has large, 
attractive pods and very large peas of splendid quality. 
It is not yet quite pure in type. 

May be distinguished from Peter Pan, to which it is most 
similar, both bearing curved pods, by being at least a week earlier; 
and from most of the other varieties by the curved pods, dwarfness 
and earliness, united in none other of the group. The seeds of 
Progress are exceptionally large, broadly oblong, compressed but 
thick, with many more of medium green color than of cream color; 
and well, but coarsely, wrinkled. 

Were it not for rather poor filling under some 
conditions, Progress would undoubtedly become a 
leading home-garden, as well as market-garden pea. 

Thos. Laxton introduced a Progress pea, of Ne 
Plus Ultra type, fifty years before his successors gave 
the name to the new variety described above. 

Onward and Trailblazer are new peas belonging 
to this group; not yet sufficiently tested for accurate 
description; nor have their histories been secured. 



BLUNT PODDED SECTION 

Thomas Laxton. This pea, as grown in America, 
except on heavy soils and under favorable weather 
conditions, would be classed here; but at its best here, 
and in England, the plants are too tall for a dwarf or 
semi-dwarf group; so Laxton is described under the Ne 
Plus Ultras (p. 72). 

The leading varieties in this section are old and 
very well known; but none is sufficiently characteristic 
to be used for fundamental reference. They are York- 
shire Hero, Horsford Market Garden and Sutton Excel- 
sior; all characterized by large, blunt-ended pods, with 
noticeable tips. 

Satisfaction. Refs. 63; Ann. Hort. 103. 1889. 
Satisfaction was introduced about 1844, by Sutton; 
and brought to America in 1889 by Johnson & Stokes. 
In spite of its age it was given an Award of Merit in 
1916 by the Royal Horticultural Society, is still listed 
in America, and was grown in our recent tests. 

In plant much like Sutton Excelsior, but in pod and pea very 
much larger' rather taller, 2 feet, with less abundant foliage, less 
whitened, the leaflets occasionally in 2s only; pods uneven, averag- 
ing 3 7 g to 4 1 , inches, with some a quarter inch longer or more than 
half an inch shorter, very broad, fairly plump, straight or very 
slightly curved, with short-rounded ends and small tips, dark green 
in color; peas 6 to 8 in well-filled pods, very uniform, medium to 
large, round or slightly indented, oval, light green, of good quality, 
seeds as sown large, round, oval or almost cubical, not deeply 
indented and about equally cream and green — as harvested much 
larger, more oblong, more flattened, and practically all good medium 
to dark green in color. 

Satisfaction was not ready until late midseason, and did not 
give a good crop, tho elsewhere reported as yielding well, as it must 
have done to hold place so long. In England it bears paired pods 
but rarely does so in the United States. 

McLean Best of All. Refs. 65; Thorburn Cat. 
1873; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:99. 1873. McLean 
Best of All was introduced in 1870 or 1871 by Dr. 
McLean and apparently was soon handled by other 
seedsmen. It came to America very promptly as it 
was listed in 1873. It is quite distinct from Sutton Best 
of All, but as both peas were handled by the same firm, 
the synonymy has become much confused. McLean Best 
of All was grown at this Station in 1884, but was not 
found for our recent trials. 

In the 1884 test it was 2 to 3 feet tall, with stocky stem, short 
internodes, basal and medial branches, deep green foliage decidedly 
whitened, glaucous on stipules, pods frequently paired, 2 to 3 
inches long, slightly recurved, short-rounded at the ends, lighter 
green than foliage, and containing 4 to 6 whitish green, oblong, 
somewhat compressed peas; seeds quite large, 72 to the ounce 
cream to very pale green in color and much wrinkled. The variety 
was prolific, very late, and matured rather slowly. The pods in 
English and French references are described as much longer; so 
the variety is placed in this large-podded group. 

Hogg groups this with McLean's Premier, but says 
plant is not as robust nor pods as large. 

Yorkshire Hero. Refs. 66-72; Country Gent. 
37:134. 1872. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:109. 1873. 
A few references where height is given as 3 Jo to 4J^ 
feet, would place this pea in the Ne Plus Ultra Group; 
but most English figures and all American ones, make it 
a dwarf or semi-dwarf pea; so it is included here. York- 



64 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



shire Hero originated with Dickson (3) about 1862, and 
reached America about 10 years later. It is still much 
grown in both countries, Laxtonian and Sutton Excelsior 
being the only peas of this group more often listed in 
America. It is widely grown on the Pacific Coast. 
It was tried at this Station in 1884, in 1893 for World's 
Fair display, and in our recent tests. The descriptions 
as far as details were given for the early trial, agree almost 
perfectly. It is evidently very well established in type. 

Taller than H Market Garden. 2>2 to 3 feet: stem 

stouter, holding plants more erect; foliage rather less abundant, 
with a bluish tint over the dark green, with long leaflets usually in 
6s, and sharp-tipped stipules; flowers higher on the stem, 14th or 
15th node; pods sometimes paired, borne on moderately long, 
heavy stalks, very slightly longer than those of Horsford, 3 to 3 - 
inches, uniform, rather broader, and with round to blunt, rather 
than blunt to square, ends: peas seldom exceed 5 in number, among 
the largest, almost square by compression, oval to oblong longi- 
tudinally, and light green in color: seeds nearly twice as large as 
those of Horsford, much indented but still quite thick, broadly- 
oval to oblong, from very light cream or bluish cream to light green, 
moderately and rather coarsely wrinkled. It varies but little in 
season from Horsford Market Garden, sometimes rather earlier; and 
still gives very' good crops tho the pods are not always well filled. 

Hogg says indistinguishable from Prolific Long-pod 
except for green seeds. 

Austral, mentioned without description in a Pacific 
Coast seedsman's list, is described in the 1922 catalog of 
F. Cooper, Wellington, N. Z., as an improved, dark green, 
giant-podded Yorkshire Hero. 2 1 .. feet tall, superior in 
size, color and flavor, with much larger, more attractive 
pods, a week or more earlier and quite as hardy. 

Dwarf Champion and Dwarf Champion of 
England. Refs. 73 76. Whether one variety or two 
are designated by these names, is now impossible to say; 
or, at least, to say which of the two or more strains of 
Dwarf Champion now grown corresponds to either name. 

As grown at this Station in 1888. Dwarf Champion 
of England seems quite distinct from Dwarf Champion 
grown in 1884; but Gregory in his catalog of 1885 uses 
both names for the same variety. 

From the early Station descriptions Dwarf Champion of 
England is short-stemmed, with very short internodes and remark- 
ably short peduncles, 1 inch, supporting 1 ' _> to 3 inch pods, borne 
high on stem, paired, numerous, distinctly paler than foliage, 
straight, very plump, but not always well filled, with tip toward 
center of pod: peas 3 to 6, very large and much compressed; seeds 
much flattened and wrinkled, mostly white. 

Dwarf Champion was 1 to 2 feet taller, with rather slender 
stems, internodes sometimes 4 inches long, and peduncles 2 to 
3 inches, with single pods 2 ' ■• to 3 inches long, very blunt at apex, 
slightly paler than the foliage, with 4 to 6 whitish green peas and 
small, very much wrinkled seeds showing two shades of cream. 

In recent tests, two Dwarf Champions show somewhat 
similar differences in height of plant. 1 ' _, to 2 feet, and 2 3 4 feet 
respectively, in node of first flower. 11 and 16 17. but the pods 
differ by only about a quarter-inch in length, tho pea and seed 
differences, especially in size of seeds sown, are more marked but 
tend to disappear with cultivation under the same conditions. 

The pods of the small-seeded strain are more like those of the 
Gem Group, of the large-seeded one more like Stratagem: but owing 
to the similarity of name and possible identity of varieties, it has 
seemed best to place both in this group and section. Both strains 

ready in late midseason and were rated as fair or good in 



Horsford Markt-i Garden. Ref. 77. This well- 
known and useful canning pea is also widely grown in 
private and market gardens. In 1879 Horsford crossed 
Alpha and American Wonder and from one pea of three 
in a pod produced Racket, and from two of them grew 
Market Garden. The two plants selected were so much 
alike that both were used to develop stock for the new 
variety, which was introduced in 1883 and 1884. The 
description of the variety as grown at the Station in 
1884 differs from that made in our late tests only in pods 
shorter by more than a quarter-inch, containing fewer 
and larger peas, and ripening over a longer season, these 
changes evidently being due to selection in the variety 
in recent years for canning-crop needs. From the three 
strains grown here the following description is made, 
modified slightly by differences noted elsewhere in large- 
area growth. 

Height of plant 2 to 2 1 > feet; stem moderately stout, round at 
the base, angular above, with short internodes, drooping, support 
useful but not necessary in garden culture, unnecessary in the 
field, branched both at base and above; foliage abundant to dense, 
dark green, small regular leaflets in 4s, occasionally in 5s, rarely 
whitened or glaucous, and slightly larger stipules rounded or even 
blunt at the tips, clasping the stem rather lightly, somewhat whitened 
and slightly glaucous, with quite large, wide teeth half way up the 
outer edge; tendrils rather prominent; flowers white, from about 
the 9th node, single or in pairs on long, heavy stalks; pods short - 
necked, arising from receptacles small for the size of the pods. 
2 ", to 3'| inches long with us, under better conditions 3' 4 to ZYi 
inches, rather broad, plump, giving round oval or almost round 
cross sections, ventrum and dorsum very slightly curved in parallel, 
making an almost straight, regular pod. blunt or almost square at the 
end, with a rather prominent tip, between light green and medium 
green in color; peas 7 to 8, above medium in size, round or slightly 
indented, oval, medium green in color, and of very good, but not 
the best, quality; seeds small, from about 130 to 145 to the ounce, 
round oval, distinctly indented but quite thick, finely wrinkled, 
usually fairly even light green in color with one-fourth or less light 
cream. 

Horsford Market Garden is a late midseason variety maturing 
for table use in about 9 ' 2 weeks. It ripens quite promptly and is 
usually second only to Advancer in productivity as a canning crop 
pea; tho in short, dry seasons Green Admiral may outyield it. 

Sharp.- Queen. Refs. 79, 80; Gregory Cat. 1890. 
This Queen pea is said to have originated with Culver- 
well, but the name of its distributors was added, who 
advertised it in 1886. It was brought to America about 
4 years later by Gregory, and has been widely grown in 
both countries. It was tried here from seed sent us by 
the University of British Columbia, but satisfactory 
vine description was not secured. 

As grown elsewhere: Height, 2 to 2 ' ■> feet, of sturdy, branch- 
ing habit, so it may be sown thinly; foliage dark green; pods 3jj 
to 4 inches long with us, 3 to 3 ! 2 inches , fairly broad and plump, 
slightly curved, with rounded to blunt ends, very dark green, too 
often not well filled; peas in well-grown pods, 5 or 6, huge, dark 
green, oval, oblong, and flattened, of fine quality. It is ready for 
use about with Horsford Market Garden, but not very productive. 

Rennie Queen 1 Ref. 79a 1 was also sent by the 
University of British Columbia; appears very similar 
to Sharpe Queen; but in our test had even larger, oblong 
peas, which were not as well colored. Rennie 's catalog 
emphasizes quality of pea, and habit of setting pods 
low and bearing freely. The variety does not appear 







A favorite old pea 



SUTTON EXCELSIOR 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




A leading canners' pe* 



ADVANCER 



(Two-thirds natural sire) I 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



65 



in recent catalogs of the firm. Whether the Queen listed 
by Northrup or the Queen described under the Telephone 
group, is either of the above, cannot now be ascertained. 
The former apparently belongs in this group tho rather 
tall, 3 1 ■> feet, and probably in this section. 

Sutton Excelsior. Refs. 86, 87; Farquhar Cat. 
1902. This Excelsior originated with Culverwell about 
1887 from a Paragon x American Wonder cross, and after 
being grown and watched for 10 years was introduced 
in 1896 by Sutton. It was brought to America in 
1902 by Farquhar. It has been widely grown in both 
England and America and is still listed by at least a 
hundred seedsmen in this country. Probably thru its 
popularity over a quarter of a century Sutton Excelsior 
has developed markedly different strains; as noted here, 
and as will be seen from figures given for the variety 
by two leading seed growers: Height, A, 1} % feet, 
B. 2' 4 feet; pod length. A, 3 1 4 inches, B, 4 inches; 
time to table use. A, 64 days, B, 80 days. 

Owing to these differences, we have selected for description 
the strain grown here from seed from the Minnesota Experiment 
Station, where special studies of garden peas had been made. This 
strain seems in most characteristics midway between differing 
extremes. Height, 1 3 4 to 2 feet; stem stout but drooping, with 
short internodes, many branches both basal and medial; foliage 
varying witn tne strain, abundant to dense, dark green, with leaf- 
lets in 4s, large, broad, slightly glaucous, little or not at all whitened, 
and stipules considerably larger, round-tipped i sharp-tipped on 
one strain', lightly clasping, with teeth to mid-margin, decidedly 
whitened and quite glaucous; tendrils not prominent; flowers from 
6th to 8th node, white or show a slight bluish shade, borne singly 
on short, thick stalks; pods rather uneven in length, sometimes 
3'. inches, but mostly 3 to 3 3 v inches, broad, only moderately 
plump, very slightly curved, not filled to edge but filled to the 
rounded or blunt, straight-tipped end, smooth or slightly wrinkled 
on the surface, light green in color I other strains show darker pods i ; 
peas 4 to 6, large, indented, oblong, yellowish green or light green, of 
good, but not the best flavor; seeds rather large, oblong, flattened, 
well wrinkled, cream and light grayish green in color. With us 
all the strains are almost, but not quite first early, the usually 
considered second early, and, as noted above, in some instances 
fully midseason; and all gave good to very good yields. 

Reading Gem (Ref. 101) was introduced by Sutton 
in 1922; and was grown at this Station in 1926 from 
seed from the U. S. Department of Agriculture plats at 
McMillan, Mich. It is a promising variety, probably 
not yet commercially introduced in America. 

Rather distinct in type, only 1 foot tall, very vigorous; stem 
stout, erect, unbranched; foliage abundant, medium to light green, 
decidedly glaucous and much whitened on the stipules, with leaflets 
medium in size and regular in shape, and stipules very much larger, 
with rounded tips, serrate on about one-third of the margin, moder- 
ately clasping, flowers from 6th node, medium to large, creamy 
white with green center, on moderately short, medium stout stalks; 
pods long, usually 3 ' 2 to 3 " g inches, but occasionally less than 3 
inches, moderately broad, very plump, sometimes thicker than 
broad, slightly saddle-backed, straight, blunt at the ends, with large 
•ips. light green in color: peas 4 to 8, averaging 5 or 6, very large, 
scarcely indented, oblong or wedge-shaped, medium green in color, 
of fair to good quality; seeds very much like those of Sutton Ex- 
celsior but rather more wrinkled. It is a first early in season and 
bears well to very well. 

DAISY SECTION 
Tho the section is named from Daisy, this pea is 
not described here. It has already been treated under 



the Wrinkled, Cream-seeded Group, where better placed, 
the character of the seeds being generally of higher deter- 
minative value than habit of growth. The peculiar 
" bunchy " character of the upper part of the plants, due 
to retardation in development of the internodes between 
the higher blossoming nodes, shown markedly in the old 
Crown pea, has led, however, to several peas being called 
" Daisy type " peas or said to be " similar to Daisy," 
and the large-podded peas so characterized have been 
placed in this section. With this characteristic in mind, 
in grouping of the leaves, buds, flowers and young pods 
more or less in clusters at the tips of the stems, with 
usually a lightening or faint yellowing of the developing 
upper leaves — to justify inclusion of the variety here, 
the other plant and pod characters may differ markedly 
from those of Daisy ; so that descriptions cannot be related 
to that variety as has been done in other groups in which 
one or more type varieties combined many characters 
common to several others of the group. 

British Wonder. Refs. 91-104. British Wonder 
was raised by Berberry, a seedsman of Kenilworth, Eng. 
It was introduced by Taber and Cullen about 1890, and 
is probably a selection from American Wonder; it was 
sent to the United States Department of Agriculture for 
trial in 1,903 by Squier and was introduced in the United 
States by Burpee, in the tollowing year, after growing 
seed from an original English stock for several years. 
It was grown here recently and proved quite like the 
introducer's description: 

Rather taller, 1 ' 2 to 2 feet; stem stout, rigid, erect, with a few 
drooping branches; foliage abundant, medium green, un whitened, 
somewhat clustered at the top like Daisy, with leaflets in 5s and 6s, 
rather large and broad, and slightly larger, round-tipped, moderately 
clasping stipules, serrate to above the middle; flowers at 7th node; 
pods single, on long, medium heavy stalks 3 1 * to 3)2 inches long, 
medium in breadth and plumpness, wrinkling rather early, straight, 
usually well filled, with blunt ends and distinct straight tips, 
medium green in color, not specially attractive; peas 5 to 8, large, 
seldom dented, oval or oblong, dark green in color, of good quality; 
seeds large, 80 to the ounce, in about equal proportions cream and 
semi-smooth or little wrinkled, and green and well wrinkled. The 
variety apparently differs in pea quality with the varying propor- 
tions of cream and green seeds, as they were reported very sweet 
in cooking tests at South Dakota Station in 1903, and medium in 
sweetness the next year. It is a midseason variety, giving a good 
yield. 

Buttercup. Refs. 105; Stumpp 8s Walter Car. 
1913. Buttercup originated with Carter about 1904, 
probably as a selection from Daisy, of which it is said 
to be a hardy form, with smoother seeds. It might be 
placed with the dimpled -seeded peas. It reached the 
United States in 1913, was soon listed by several firms 
and is still retained by about as many, tho never very 
well known. As grown here it was a marked illustration 
of the change in seed character possible in a single season, 
those sown being only moderately dimpled and rather 
dull cream in color while those harvested were larger, 
well wrinkled and with more light green than cream- 
colored seeds. It showed the " Daisy " clustering of 
foliage quite decidedly. 

More dwarf than British Wonder, with more medial branches, 
but none from the base of the stem; foliage glaucous, dense, with 



66 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



leaflets in 4s. overlapping, rolled and crinkled, and stipules rolled 
and crinkled; pod stalks shorter and thicker than those of British 
rr. podl smoother, rather longer, broader, not as plump, often 
slightly curved toward the tip. with pointed or rounded, lipless ends, 
medium green peas 5 to 7. smaller, round or slight h 

indented, long oval or oblong, medium green in color. It was later 
than British Wonder by a few days to a week, but from its g m ooth fif 
seeds, might l>e sown earlier. It was about the same in productivity. 

( onnoiaacur Rcf. 112), which is entirely distinct 
from L.ixton's Ne Plus Ultra type pea of that name. 

introduced in this country in 1914 or 1915 by Ferry, 
who secured the seed from Cooper-Taber. 

In plant habits very similar to British Wonder; 1 ' _• to 2 feet 
tall; stem stout; branches basal and medial: foliage rather darker 
green, distinctly whitened, flowers from 8th instead of 7th node, 
frequently paired, with heavier stalks; pods possibly a trifle longer 
and very uniform, broader and not quite as plump, with long 

ti d points, medium green in color, about as well filled; peas of 
similar size and shape, but not as well colored. 

It is later than British Wonder by a full week, and 
produced about as well, only good crops. 

Sul Ion Supreme Ref. 113i was introduced in 
1921 by Sutton; has been grown at this Station from 
British Columbia seed: and in United States Department 
of Agriculture tests; but has not been cataloged in this 
country. 

Height 1 ' ■> to 2 feet; stem square, heavy, with short inter- 
nodes, particularly above, few small medial branches; leaflets large. 



broad, light green covered with bloom and with marked white areas, 
rounded at the base, almost straight at the sides and deeply, some- 
times doubly, notched at the tips; stipules huge, very deeply clasping 
the stem, bloom and whitening intensified and veins distinctly 
whitened; the light cream flowers not opening fully, single, from 
12th or 13th node, and, with light-colored new leaves, and develop- 
ing pods, are clustered at the top of the stem; tendrils heavy and 
moderately curled; pods 3 ' £ to 3 ( inches long, broad, very plump, 
straight, blunt ended with small tip, very dark green in color and 
well filled to the tip, tho not always to the edge; peas 5 to 7, very 
large, oval, oblong, dark green, of very good quality; seeds large, 
dull, bluish cream and light green, well wrinkled. Supreme is a 
second early or midseason variety, yielding very well. 

Superb Earl} Dwarf iRef. 114) has been grown 
here from seed supplied by Griswold (1), by whom it 
was first listed in 1922. 

About half a foot shorter than Connoisseur, unbranched. with 
rather less abundant, medium green foliage bunched at the top, 
with leaflets in 4s and long rather than broad, much larger, sharp- 
tipped stipules with few teeth, lighter in color than the leaflets, 
both leaflets and stipules being whitened and glaucous; flowers 
begin at 6th node; pods single on short, thick, stalks, 2 ' •_. to 3j i 
inches long, broad, plump, straight, well-filled both to the edge 
and to the square, small-tipped end, wrinkling early and light green 
in color, keeping only moderately well; peas 4 to 7, fairly large, 
indented, oblong, light green in color, of only fair to good quality; 
seeds decidedly smaller than those of Connoisseur, oblong, flattened, 
fairly well wrinkled and mixed cream and green in color. 

Superb Early Dwarf is a second early pea producing only fair 
to good crops. 



ADVANCER GROUP 



The Advancer group of peas began with this very- 
well-known pea, now perhaps the favorite, with growers, 
of all wrinkled canning peas. As with several other 
groups, little or no history can be given back of the type 
variety, as this was a cross and decidedly unlike the 
known one of its parents, or any pea likely to have been 
the other parent. Several of the varieties mentioned in 
the group probably have no inheritance relationship with 
Advancer, but are included because of general similarity 
in essential horticultural characters. 

As the type variety is oldest, it is first described in 
considerable detail, with the later varieties discussed in 
chronological order of first known date, and their dis- 
tinguishing characteristics, only, emphasized. 

tdvancer. Refs. 1 3; Rural N. Y. 11:159. 
1860; Bliss Car. 1866. Dr. McLean made many 
crosses between Beck Gem and some of the best marrows 
wrinkled peas) of his time; and turned over to Turner 
most of the varieties developed. Among these was 
Advancer, which Turner introduced in 1860. The 
Rural New- Yorker spoke of Advancer in the same year, 
but it was probably not introduced in the United States 
until 1865, by Bliss. The variety spread slowly in Amer- 
ica at first, but by 1875 was well known, and with the 
development of the canning industry has become widely 
spread. It is now little known in England, where its 
lack of high table quality has almost retired it in favor 
of dwarf peas of sweeter taste and more delicate flavor 
or of taller varieties with fine peas in huge pods. For 
growers of canning peas, the productivity of Advancer 
and the tonnage given by the large peas make it a prime 
favorite; but the canners themselves prefer varieties that 



do not harden so rapidly at maturity, that grade better, 
and that give canned goods of better color and quality. 

Advancer has been tested here for two or more 
seasons, both in the garden and in our canning crop 
plats from seed grown in various localities. These 
strains varied considerably, especially from the financial 
standpoint, in the canning crop tests, where variations 
in the size of seed directly influenced the number of 
vines to the acre, and indirectly but even more noticeably, 
changed the relative proportions of the different grades 
of peas. 

In general, the characters of Advancer are about 
as given below: 

Seed green with a small percentage cream colored; decidedly 
but somewhat coarsely wrinkled; oval in long diameter and dis- 
tinctly flattened or compressed, often like short sections of a slightly 
flattened cylinder; with obscure radicles and green cotyledons; 
height 3 to 3J 2 feet, but some strains much shorter, vigorous; stem 
stout, angular, with intcrnodes of medium length, usually branched 
both near the ground and near the flowering node; foliage medium 
to abundant, dark to medium green, rarely whitened, consisting of 
medium sized, rather long leaflets in 4s and 6s, scarcely glaucous, 
and stipules only slightly larger, with sharp tips and a few small 
basal teeth, more glaucous than the leaflets; flowers start at 12th 
to 14th node, white, of medium size, single or frequently in pairs 
on long, moderately thick stalks: pods numerous, quite uniform, 
from 2 s 1 to 3 ' , inches long, medium to narrow in width, plump, 
smooth or slightly wrinkled when ready to pick, round to oval in 
section, straight, filled to the edge and to the blunt or square ends, 
which bear rather large straight tips, somewhat lighter in color than 
the foliage, about medium green; peas 6 or 7, medium to large, 
round oval or short flattened cylindrical, light green to medium 
green. 

Advancer has been one of the best yielders of all 
peas grown, with pods ready to pick in the garden in 58 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



67 



to 60 days from late sowing or in 63 to 65 days from 
earlier sowing. For the canners' harvest, from 70 to 
74 days are required in ordinary seasons, the pods matur- 
ing quite uniformly. An Improved Advancer, cataloged 
since 1918, at least, is slightly more dwarf than the old 
Advancer, more vigorous, with darker, more abundant 
foliage, rather shorter but plumper pods, and better 
color in both pods and peas. 

Alpha. Refs. 6, 7; Gard. Chron. 70. 1870; Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 12:35. 1890; Thorburn Car. 
1870; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:104. 1873. Alpha 
differs somewhat from Advancer, but is included in the 
group as more like Advancer than like any other well- 
known pea. It originated with Laxton about 1867 
and was said by Carter, its introducer, to be from a 
Laxton Prolific x Advancer cross; but Laxton later gave 
the parents as Little Gem and Ringleader. It created 
quite a furor and was widely grown in England, in France 
and in America, which it reached in 1870. Hogg's 
description and figure of Alpha would place the variety 
in the Senator group, the pods being decidedly curved 
and rather slender and the peas small. 

It was grown at this Station from 1882 to 1884, and 
also in our recent tests from English seed. 

It was earlier than Advancer, more slender-stemmed, rarely 
branched, with scanty, light green foliage and pale pods, which 
were shorter and broader than those of Advancer and sometimes 
slightly curved at the tip. It was not very prolific, but matured its 
crop promptly. The peas were very large and poorly colored. 

Bliss Abundance. Refs. 11, 12; Rural N. Y. 
4.'i:52, 99. 1884; Burpee Car. 1893. Bliss Abundance, 
one of the best known peas of American origin, was, 



surprisingly, introduced first in England about 1883, 
by Howcroft & Atkins, London. It is said the American 
originator or introducer (which, is not stated) received 
$1,000 for the seed sent to England. Abundance origi- 
nated with Arnold, and was introduced by Bliss, who 
announced it for sale in America in 1884. It soon estab- 
lished itself and is still considerably grown. 

It was very dwarf when first introduced, from \}{ to \% feet, 
but like most varieties not rigidly selected it has increased in height, 
now generally exceeds 2 feet, and often reaches 3 feet, but is 
usually half a foot shorter than Advancer under similar conditions; 
foliage rather more abundant and darker, with slightly larger 
stipules usually somewhat whitened, and with leaflets very rarely 
in 6s; pods more frequently paired, slightly longer than those of 
Advancer (3 J4 inches); peas 8 in the better pods instead of 7 in 
Advancer. It is slightly later than Advancer and bears as well if 
not better, in garden tests at least; but the strain used on a canning 
pea plat was inferior to Advancer in every way. 

Canners' Perfection (Davis' Perfection) is an im- 
proved Abundance pea, a selection made several years 
ago by W. A. Davis, then an employee of the Rice Co. — 
apparently better suited to canners' use than the original 
strain. Its pods are slightly longer than those of Abun- 
dance, very plump, not quite so blunt-ended and with 
smaller tip, better colored, and with more and smaller 
peas, which are also darker green. The foliage is more 
dense than that of Abundance, and the leaflets usually 
in 6s . It bears lower on the vine and the pods are often 
paired. 

Bliss' Abundance, rather than Sutton Abundance, 
is probably the variety tested by the Royal Horticul- 
tural Society in 1926. {Jour. 52:42. 1927.) 



STRATAGEM GROUP 



This is one of the smaller groups of peas, and of 
somewhat indefinite limits, as the medium-sized pods, 
with the rounded ends and sharp points rather than 
definite tips, of Stratagem pass by imperceptible grada- 
tions to the larger pods of the Telephone group or its 
dwarf representatives of the Gradus and Laxton ian types; 
to the large square-ended pods of the tall-vined Ne 
Plus Ultras or the more dwarf Thos. Laxtons; and to the 
curved-podded representatives of other adjoining groups. 
Peas of this group differ from those of the Advancer 
group mainly in shorter, more bushy plants, long- 
rounded rather than blunt-ended pods, and rather more 
coarsely wrinkled peas. 

As the parentage of Stratagem is unknown, the 
history of the group begins with the variety, which seems 
to have been a rather distinct break in type from those 
current when it originated. 

Stratagem. Refs. 1-5; Rural N. Y. 42:149. 
1883; Johnson Seed Co. Car. 1909. Stratagem was 
introduced about 1879 by Carter, and was probably a 
selection made by them from Telephone or Telegraph. 
Wm. Culverwell, originator of Telegraph, claimed, also, 
to have found in stock of that variety grown by him, 
plants that could not be distinguished from Telephone, 
and others that were identical with Stratagem, both 
varieties introduced by Carter. Stratagem differed from 



Telegraph in better wrinkling of the seeds, and from 
both Telegraph and Telephone in dwarfness of plant, 
and in having shorter, straighter, less pointed pods. 
Danby Stratagem, introduced by Carter about 10 
years later, and several Improved and Re-Selected 
Stratagems listed by other seedsmen, have been almost 
indistinguishable from well -grown and well-rogued 
stocks of the original variety. The sporting tendencies 
of Stratagem have always made it a difficult pea to keep 
true to its best type; and have led to its practical aban- 
donment in recent years, tho when introduced it was 
called the " finest pea in the world " and it received 
twice the highest award from the Royal Horticultural 
Society, an honor said not before to have been awarded 
any variety. Stratagem first reached America in 1883, 
Improved Stratagem in 1896, and Danby Stratagem in 
1909. These stocks have now become inextricably 
mixed, in America, at least; and no recent small-scale 
tests can be relied on to separate the strains. 

The variety was tried at this Station in 1884: Height \]/i 
feet; stem remarkably strong, angular, often with medial branches, 
rarely with basal; with internodes rarely exceeding 2 inches; foliage 
rather abundant, deep green, much whitened near the base of the 
plants, remarkably compact near the top of the stem, more or less 
waved and twisted, similar in some ways to Daisy; pods usually 
single, on short stalks, of same color as foliage, 2)2 to 4 inches long, 
often somewhat irregular in shape and rounding very gradually 



68 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



at the ends: peas 4 to 9. large, very pale green, slightly oblong, 
much compressed; seeds pale green or almost creamy white, much 
flattened and wrinkled, about 81 seeds to the ounce. 

Neither season nor productivity was stated; but 
other American references of about that time say it was 
a midseason pea and very productive, tho one grower 
said it did not yield enough to make a satisfactory mar- 
ket garden pea. In 1893 Bui. 691 Stratagem was found 
here to be of " first quality, fine flavor." The vines 
were tall, compact, vigorous, and the variety a " good 
cropper." tho late. 

Several strains of Stratagem. Danby Stratagem and 
Improved Stratagem have been grown in our recent tests; 
and the points supplementary to the early description, 
or differences from it are indicated below: 

Height 1 ' _■ to 3 feel Danby and Improved strains toward 
higher limits ; branches very rarely both medial and basal, often 
medial, occasionally lacking: foliage abundant to dense, darker 
than medium green, whitened slightly on leaflets, considerably on 
stipules, leaflets usually 4, of medium length but rather broad, 
stipules varying from much larger than leaflets at base of plant to 
only slightly larger above, moderately to lightly clasping, with 
heavy teeth below middle, and with rounded tips; tendrils quite 
prominent; flowers above 12th or 13th node; pods single on short. 
rather heavy stalks. 3 ' i to 4 ' ■> inches long, moderately broad, 
almost plump to plump, smooth or slightly wrinkled in a vein- 
like arrangement, straight and straight-backed, with dorsum almost 
parallel but rounding almost equally to very short neck and rather 
long-rounded end, with small straight tip, medium green in color; 
peas 7 to 9 in well filled pods (too rarei, large, oval or oblong and 
round or slightly indented, medium green, of fair to good quality. 
seeds only coarsely wrinkled, of medium size, mixed cream and light 
green. The pods were ready in midseason, or later, and in no case 
were the crops better than good. 

Sharpe Triumph. Refs. 7, 8; Rural N. Y. 
H:496. 1885. Sharpe Triumph originated with Cul- 
verwell. was named and introduced by Sharpe in 1883, 
and reached America within two years. 

It was grown at this Station in 1888 and appears to 
have differed from Stratagem in more compact habit 
of growth - dwarfer. with shorter internodes — and 
shorter and more uniform pods containing more, and 
more flattened, seeds. The principal difference, however, 
was in a decided curving of the pods of Triumph, which 
considered by itself would exclude the variety from this 
group; but some references, English, American and 
French, say the pods were straight, while others in the 
first two countries agree with the Station description. 

I»\»arf Defiance Ref. 11 was raised by Laxton 
and was first known as John Lee, under which name it 
received the highest commendatory award of the Royal 
Horticultural Society in 1892. The stock, before this 
time, had been purchased by Sutton who gave the variety 
its current name, and introduced it after re-selection. 
In 1901 it received an Award of Merit from the Royal 
Horticultural Society under the new name. It was 
grown in America in 1904 in the Department of Agri- 
culture tests, but was not introduced commercially 
under its own name for several years, tho Potlatch, 
introduced somewhat before Dwarf Defiance appeared 
in the United States, is said, by some, to be identical 
with the latter. Dwarf Defiance, as grown here: 



Rather more dwarf than Stratagem, 1 ' 4 to 1 ' j feet (elsewhere 
reaches 2 feet and in England 3 ' | feet . pods occasionally in pairs, 
broader, with a slight curve at the tip, which is somewhat more 
pointed, dark green in color, and better filled; peas larger, of better 
quality, more compressed than those of Stratagem: seeds decidedly- 
larger and much flattened. 

Dwarf Defiance was about 3 days earlier than 
Stratagem; but the crops were rather disappointing, tho 
elsewhere in America they have been heavy. It is 
considered a very satisfactory dwarf main crop pea. 

\«->» Life Ref. 12 was introduced in this country 
in 1896, probably by Breck. Gregory says the origi- 
nator sought to secure a new pea with all the good points 
of Stratagem without the defect of small pods; and New 
Life resulted. It was much commended and soon became 
very popular but was also soon superseded by other 
varieties. It was 2 to 2 ' •_> feet tall, in season about with 
Stratagem or a little earlier, very prolific, with long, 
straight, broad pods, 3' | to 4 inches long, containing 
S to 8 large peas of good quality. It was a Stratagem 
improved in productivity and regularity of pod size. 

Sherwood. Refs. 15, 16; Thorburn Cat. 1908. 
Sherwood was introduced about 1901, probably by Hurst, 
and received an Award of Merit from the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society in that year. The first American refer- 
ence is dated 1908. This has been a popular pea in 
England; and grown to some extent in America, tho 
not found listed here in recent years. It is compared 
with English Wonder, American Wonder, British Wonder 
and Stratagem; and with us more like the latter. 

Height about 1 ' 2 to 1 :, .| feet, very similar to Stratagem in 
habit, branches and foliage, but with sharper-tipped stipules, 
having smaller serrations extending farther up the lobes; flowers 
much lower, 7th node; pods fine green in color, decidedly smaller. 
3 . to 3 ' 1 inches long, but quite uniform, decidedly wrinkled when 
ready to pick, not as long rounded at the ends and showing a tip: 
peas about 6, very large, indented, wide oblong or nearly square, 
glistening dark green, very good quality; seeds rather smoother 
and less green than those of Stratagem. The season is fully a week 
earlier than that of Stratagem, and the crops were good. 

Potlatch. Refs. 20 22. Potlatch, an Indian word 
for " big dinner," was the name applied to a pea said 
to have come from the Pacific Coast and introduced, 
probably about 1906, by Leonard. It was pronounced 
identical with Dwarf Defiance or Improved Stratagem 
by several who cataloged it; but a leading pea grower, 
very careful of stock and descriptions, listed both Dwarf 
Defiance and Potlatch and noted several of the differ- 
ences that we found in recent tests of them. 

Plants of Potlatch 4 to 6 inches or more taller than those of 
Dwarf Defiance; stem somewhat less angled at the base; foliage 
more dense but not quite as dark green, with stipules relatively 
smaller and more wrinkled; flowers at least three nodes higher than 
Dwarf Defiance: pods are almost half an inch shorter, not as well 
filled and very long-rounded at the points; peas about one less; 
both pods and peas better colored. Potlatch, with us, was distinctly 
later than Dwarf Defiance, and not very productive. 

Big Marvel, introduced by the Schultz Seed Store, 
Washington, D. C, is said by another seedsman, who 
cataloged it the following year, to be identical with 
Potlatch; but both speak of it as early, which Potlatch 
is not. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



69 



CHAMPION OF ENGLAND GROUP 



The Champion of England group begins with 
Knight's Marrows, the first named varieties with wrinkled 
seeds. Wrinkled peas were known before Knight's 
time, being mentioned by Tragus and Dodoneaus in the 
middle of the sixteenth century, and Knight used plants 
producing such seeds in his crosses, but his statements 
indicate that these were not of any named variety. 
Some authorities believe the Rouncival peas were 
wrinkled, but we have nowhere been able to find any 
definite statement to that effect; and the various Roun- 
cival names have been used as synonyms of different 
old varieties plainly belonging to the smooth -seeded, 
or American marrowfat type, or to other groups of round 
peas, green or blue in color. Connection of Champion 
of England with the Knight peas has not been definitely 
established; but as these peas, or immediate descend- 
ants of them, were the only wrinkled peas known when 
Champion originated, the relationship may be assumed, 
especially as early references place the variety in the 
group of " Knight's Green " peas. 

As all of the Knight peas have passed out of culti- 
vation, except, possibly, Knight Dwarf White Marrow 
and Knight Tall White Marrow (or Jenny Lind), dis- 
cussed in the " Cream-seeded Wrinkled " group, only 
a summary of group characteristics of them will be given, 
preceding Champion of England, which is described in 
detail. 

Knight Marrows. Refs. 1-10; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:247. 1885. The varieties of this group include tall 
and dwarf (so called) forms of white, green, and blue 
wrinkled peas, the names and synonyms showing about 
all possible combinations of the descriptive terms used, 
prefixed by the name of the originator, Thomas Andrew 
Knight, Downton Castle, Wiltshire, Eng., one of the 
most useful plant breeders and students of fruit and 
vegetable problems of his time. With him started the 
line of sweet, wrinkled peas which has made that vege- 
table the leading spring and early summer garden crop 
of England, and which has resulted in the grand varieties 
of today. The exact date of origin of the separate 
varieties is unknown, but probably previous to 1827. 
All were described in 1834 or 1836, two years before 
Knight died, and at least one, the Tall Green Marrow, 
reached America in 1827. As indicated by the names, 
the varieties were separated by their heights (5 to 7 feet 
for tall types, 2 ' •_» feet or less to 3 } ■> feet or more for 
dwarfs), and the color of the seeds. All were rather 
early midseason varieties except the Dwarf Green Wrin- 
kled Marrow, which was ten days to two weeks later 
than the others. 

As grown here in 1884, Knight Tall Green Marrow was 3 to 
5 feet tall; stem medium or large, with internodes rarely exceeding 
lYl inches: and Knight Dwarf Green Marrow, 1 to 2 feet tall; stem 
stocky, with internodes usually under 2 inches; both sometimes 
branched at the base and often above; foliage between light and deep 
green, slightly washed white, very glaucous in the dwarf type and 
less so in the taller one: pods usually in pairs, 2 to 3 inches long, 
blunt at the tips when well filled; peas 4 to 8 (rarely exceeding 5 



in the dwarf form i, large, whitish green in color, compressed in well- 
filled pods, sweet and of good flavor; seeds quite large, olive green 
tinted almost white. High productivity was a merit of all Knight's 
peas; but the smallness of the pods would prevent classing them as 
high yielders now. 

Champion of England. Refs. 11, 13; Jour. 
Hort. 1:237. 1861; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:246. 1884. 
Champion of England was introduced, through various 
seedsmen, by Fairbeard, in 1846, after having been grown 
by him for at least five years. It is said that Champion 
of England and Fairbeard Surprise came originally from 
one pod, found in a crop of Knight Dwarf White Marrow. 
One seed produced a wrinkled and the other a smooth- 
seeded variety. Another reference states that the stock 
of Champion was sold, on Sunday morning, for a pot of 
beer. The variety was brought to the United States in 
1849, and in 1901 was the pea most listed in American 
seedsmen's catalogs; while in 1921, most surprisingly, 
it was still fifth or sixth in the lists. As grown at this 
Station in 1884, Champion of England, except for size 
of pods, differed very little from Knight Tall Green 
Marrow in characteristics, but was much earlier and was 
considered much more prolific, and with peas unsur- 
passed in flavor and sweetness. 

In our recent tests Champion of England and 
Improved Champion of England were grown, both 
from American seed. 

Height of original variety 4 to 5 feet, or in one season 4 to 
4 J/2 feet; stem stout, with rather short internodes, branched rather 
freely both at base and above; foliage abundant to almost dense, 
rather darker than medium green, with leaflets in 4s, medium in 
size and non-characteristic in shape, and much larger, deeply clasp- 
ing stipules, somewhat whitened and slightly glaucous, rounded at 
the tip and with shallow teeth about half way up the edge; tendrils 
rather prominent, but slender; flowers medium in size, white, 
from 14th node on short stem, 17th on tallest ones, single, differing 
in this respect from the variety as grown 40 years before; pods 
smooth, light-colored, on long, slender stalks; much longer than 
those of Knight Marrows, from 3 '4 to 3 5 s inches, rarely 4 inches, 
medium in width, not very plump, straight or very slightly curved, 
fairly well filled, rounded to blunt at the ends, and without distinct 
tips; peas 5 to 7, of medium size, smooth, round, oval, not crowded 
in the pods, and light green in color, of excellent quality, sweet, 
moderately thin-skinned, and tender; seeds large, broadly oval, 
thick and occasionally indented, faintly bluish cream to light green 
in color, and well wrinkled. 

The crops were good, beginning in late midseason, 
71 days from May 11, or 68 from May 22, and ripening 
slowly. In England, before the variety was introduced, 
pods were ready to pick on June 2, the eadiest date for 
any wrinkled pea up to that time. 

The Improved Champion of England, as compared 
with the old type: 

Stems slenderer, less branched; foliage rather lighter colored 
with smaller leaflets often in 6s, decidedly smaller stipules longer 
and narrower, with sharp tips and sharper teeth; pods shorter, 
plumper, blunt-ended, deeper green; peas averaging fewer, smaller, 
often much compressed, and of better color; seeds decidedly smaller, 
with more green color and better wrinkled. 

The Improved strain was not as early as the original 
and did not yield as well, especially when the smaller 



70 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



size of the pods is considered: but the peas were probably 
even better in quality tho no definite comparison was 
made between the two strains. 

Napoleon. Refs. 27; Hovey Car. 1859; Hogg 
Card. Yt. Bk 14:107. 1873. Napoleon, Climax, 
and Pairhead Excelsior are regarded as identical, but 
were probably of independent, tho nearly simultaneous, 
origin by selection from Knight Dwarf Green Wrinkled 
Marrow. Hogg gives Napoleon only as a synonym of 
Climax. 

Napoleon and Eugenie, a similar but white-seeded 
variety, said to have originated from seeds in the same 
pod, were raised by Harrison, and announced in 1856 
as superior to Unique and Masterpiece, varieties pre- 
viously distributed by him. Napoleon was brought 
to America in 1859 and said to be much earlier than 
Champion of England, and a great bearer. It was about 
3 feet tall. 

( Umax. Refs. 27; Hogg Gard. Yt. Bk. 11:107. 
1873. Later in the same year, and in the same periodical 
in which Napoleon was announced. Climax and Alli- 
ance, a white wrinkled pea, were advertised as superior to 
Perfection and Glory, Harrison's dimpled peas sold the 
previous year. As no connection of Climax with 
Napoleon is here mentioned, it is probable that these 
two peas, with the similar white seeded varieties, Alliance 
and Eugenie, and their predecessors. Unique and Master- 
piece, as well as the dimpled peas, Perfection and Glory, 
were all selections from the Knight peas, made within a 
year or two. 

Climax reached America in 1861. both it and 



Napoleon being listed by the same firm and evidently 
regarded as distinct, Climax being smaller than Napo- 
leon, and early. Hogg condemns Climax because of its 
poorly filled pods, many peas aborting. 

Fort) Fold. Refs. 29; Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. 
Forty Fold, or Forty Fold Champion, originated with 
Fairbeard, about 1864. Several American seedsmen 
listed it between 1889 and 1907 and it was still cataloged 
by more than dozen firms in 1901. It was a selection 
from Champion of England and an improvement on 
that variety. 

Shorter in stem, with larger pods, longer and considerably 
curved, almost scimitar shaped, and better filled; peas of poor 
color, of medium size, oval, sweet, juicy and well flavored; seeds 
light green and very well wrinkled. The variety was late like 
Champion of England, but more prolific and held freshness better. 

Free ll<;ir<-r i Ref. 34 i is a comparatively new pea 
of the old Champion of England type, which originated 
with Kelway before 1922. It was grown at the Idaho 
Station, from which seed was secured for a test at this 
Station. It is probably not known commercially in the 
United States. 

It proved to be dwarf, 2 J 2 feet tall, with only a few basal 
branches; foliage abundant dark green, frequently with 6 leaflets 
as in Improved Champion; flowers very free from the 14th node; 
pods rarely paired, 3 to 3 •' » inches long, rather narrow but very 
plump, very slightly curved, well filled, with rounded to blunt ends 
and often with rather large tips; peas very uniform in the pods, 
smooth, round or slightly indented, oval, medium in size and color, 
seeds very small, 170 to the ounce, much flattened, often almost 
cylindrical, well wrinkled and light green, greenish or bluish cream 
and cream in color. The season was the same as that of Champion; 
and crop very good. 



NE PLUS ULTRA GROUP 



This old group is another with indefinite limits. 
The crossing of types which has lead to the introduction 
of most wrinkled pea varieties has grouped characteris- 
tics in very diverse combinations; parents outside a 
group may have progeny which can be classed in the 
group only, if the leading group characteristics are con- 
sidered; or parents, both unmistakably showing group 
characters, fail to transmit these but carry recessive 
factors that place some descendant in a group of entirely 
different types. 

The variety Ne Plus Ultra is not, and never has 
been, very widely known in America; and may not 
bring to mind as clear a picture to represent its group 
as Senator, Little Gem, or Telephone do of theirs; but, 
unfortunately, few other varieties of the group are much 
better known here, peas of the type or types here col- 
lected not being very popular or very successful in 
America, tho filling an important place in English and 
European pea culture. Thos. Laxton is probably the 
best known member of the group; but this is a compara- 
tively recent addition and rather short -stemmed to be 
typical. Ne Plus Ultra is more than 80 years old; but 
is still listed and grown in England; and an improved 
type of it is becoming prominent in Sweden. The 
varieties of the group, within wide limits in many direc- 
tions, have tall stems, round and slender at the base, 
enlarged and angular above, with long internodes, occa- 



sional medial branches, and abundant, light green foliage; 
pods single or paired, from about the middle of the stem 
on long, slender stalks, medium to fairly large, broad, 
hardly plump, straight or slightly curved, with rounded 
to blunt, or rarely square ends, with small tips; peas 
3 to 7, large, rather oblong, of fine quality; seeds medium 
sized, finely wrinkled, cream, greenish cream or light 
green. The Ne Plus Ultra varieties are essentially 
blunt-ended, plump-podded correlatives of members of 
the Telephone group. 

The type variety, Ne Plus Ultra, was preceded by 
one of somewhat similar type, the old Magnum Bonum, 
which is first discussed. The history and characters, 
in considerable detail, of Ne Plus Ultra are next given; 
after which the other varieties of the group are described 
by those characters which connect them with the type 
variety or separate them from it. 

Magnum Bonum. Refs. 1, 2; Hogg Gard. Yt. 
Bk. 11:103. 1873. The name Magnum Bonum is 
very old in English pea literature, but references ally it 
so closely with Ne Plus Ultra that it may be only the 
name for a portion of the old stock of peas of this type 
grown without name for many years at Berkhempstead. 
Hogg says Ne Plus Ultra was selected from that stock 
by Brownlees after it had been locally known for many 
years. Hogg does not mention Magnum Bonum, but 
gives Cullingford's Champion as a synonym of Ne Plus 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



71 



Ultra; and others say Magnum Bonum was Cullingford s; 
so the three names may apply to one pea. The two 
varieties are, at least, very similar; and the descriptions 
given do not permit separation. Sutton's and Ambler's 
Magnum Bonums of later date were quite different; but 
are probably the varieties grown in America under the 
name. 

W Plus Ultra. Refs. 4 11; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 
544. 1863; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:103. 1873. The 
origin of Ne Plus Ultra is unknown; but Thos. Andrew 
Knight's name is associated with it in one advertise- 
ment; Knight's Albert Edward is given as a synonym, 
and the variety is said to be " very close to Knight 
Dwarf Green Marrow." It was apparently first adver- 
tised by Brownlees in 1845, and a later reference says 
it was introduced under several names in successive 
seasons between 1837 and 1847. Gen. Wyndham is 
generally given as a synonym of Ne Plus Ultra but 
Hogg says it was produced from that variety tho a 
much more vigorous grower, with much larger pods 
and a longer season. In America Ne Plus Ultra was 
described by Burr in 1863, listed in the United States 
Patent Office Report for 1865, noticed in a rural publi- 
cation in 1870, tested by the United States Department 
of Agriculture in 1904, and grown by one of the leading 
seed-pea firms in 1907. It was not grown at the Station 
during its early years but was included here for the 
World's Fair display in 1893, when found tall, vigorous, 
of good quality, late. It was not found listed in America 
during our recent trials but seed of it was sent here from 
British Columbia and from Idaho. 

In England Ne Plus Ultra grows very tall, sometimes TV2 
feet, but here it seldom exceeded 4j-£ feet; stems slender, round at 
the base but enlarged and angular above, with long internodes 
and moderately prominent nodes, occasionally branched below the 
flowering node, 10th- foliage abundant, light green, almost bloom- 
less and little whitened, with non-characteristic leaflets in 4s and 5s, 
and much larger, round-tipped stipules with shallow teeth at the 
base, and clasping the stem deeply; pods single or in pairs on long 
slender stalks, 3 to 3 3 s inches long, occasionally 3 3 4, with long 
sepals, broad, only moderately plump, oval to flat in cross section, 
straight, almost blunt at the ends or rarely square, with small 
recurved tips, smooth or slightly wrinkled when ready to pick, 
good dark green in color, with heavy bloom giving a grayish cast, 
holding freshness well; peas 3 to 7, large, oval to long-oblong usu- 
ally separated in the pod, smooth coated, dark green in color and of 
splendid quality; Idaho seeds were much smaller than those from 
British Columbia and all cream colored, the other being one-third 
green. These differences practically disappeared in the crop seeds 
of the two strains. The variety is not ready until past midseason, 
requiring 9 weeks from very late sowing to more than 10 for earlier 
ones. The crops in different years ranged from fair to very good. 

Quality rather than productivity is the commonly 
noted merit of Ne Plus Ultra. 

Non Plus Ultra, an improved strain, was grown here 
from seed sent by the Swedish improver, and is quite 
different in many ways: 

Dwarfer, heavier stemmed, with shorter internodes, often 
with two stems from base and branches from mid-stem, with small 
leaflets in 4s, and lightly clasping stipules, both much darker in 
color but with heavy bloom; pods slightly shorter, usually quite 
uniform, but occasionally only 2 3 4 inches long, narrow, plump and 
square-ended or even protuberant, more like those of some of the 



Gems than like the old Ne Plus Ultra. Peas 7, very large, not of 
as good color as in the original variety, but of excellent quality. 
The season was a little earlier and the crop better. 

Carter has recently reintroduced, or improved, Ne 
Plus Ultra and the variety was " highly commended " 
in Royal Horticultural Society tests. 

Conqueror. Refs. 12, 13; Rural N. Y. 47:113. 
1888. Conqueror is said to have originated with Payne, 
of Gayton, Eng., who found it as a sport in a field of 
Knight Tall Green Marrow. Part of the stock was sold 
to the Messrs. Jeyes of Northampton, who sent it out as 
Jeyes Conqueror. Both this name and Payne Con- 
queror are given as synonyms of Ne Plus Ultra, but the 
two varieties are distinct, originating at different times, 
one from Knight Tall Green Marrow and the other 
probably from Knight Dwarf Green Marrow. Con- 
queror was more vigorous, had larger pods, and filled 
better than the original Ne Plus Ultra. As Payne 
Conqueror, this pea was grown here in 1888 and differed 
from the current and recent descriptions of Ne Plus 
Ultra, having pods often paired, borne high on the stems, 
on short, curved stalks and containing flattened seeds. 
It was productive, but too tall and too late to be con- 
sidered valuable. 

Ritchie Conqueror, grown here recently from seeds 
received from British Columbia, is only 3}^> feet tall, 
has stout, unbranched stems, rather scanty foliage with 
larger leaflets and stipules which are more whitened but 
less glaucous than those of Ne Plus Ultra, flowers high 
and has more pointed pods, hardly of this type, with 
similar peas and even larger seeds. It was fully as late, 
and unproductive. 

Veitch Perfection. Refs. 15 19; Evans Car. 
1868. Were Veitch Perfection, as grown in America, 
more true to the Ne Plus Ultra type, its name might 
well be applied to this group, as it has been more widely 
grown than the type variety; but it differs from Ne Plus 
Ultra and others of the group in many points. It is 
included by relationship, rather than by resemblance. 

The variety originated with Veitch (1) before 1857, 
probably as a selection from Hairs Dwarf Mammoth; 
and after 70 years is still extensively grown in England. 
It came to America about 10 years after its introduction, 
was listed by several firms as lately as 1901, and, as 
Perfection, is probably still grown by Pacific Coast seed 
firms. It was very popular in the Northwest. 

It was grown at the Station in 1884, but was not 
found, at least not under the full name, in 1921 or 1922 
American catalogs. In the old tests: 

Height 3) 2 to 4 feet, with strong stem, much branched at 
base and often above, with internodes of medium length; foliage 
ample, deep green, only slightly whitened and slightly glaucous on 
stipules; pods shorter than those of Ne Plus Ultra (not so in 
England), 23^-3 inches, often paired, straight, broad, "tapering 
gradually to apex" lothers say blunt-ended), medium green (others 
say " good " or " dark " green): peas 5 to 6, large, flattened, whitish 
green; seeds large, much flattened and wrinkled, dull, pale green 
and bluish white. The variety was late, tho earlier than Ne Plus 
Ultra, matured pods slowly and was " extremely prolific." 

It was considered in England the finest pea of the 
Knight Green Marrow class. 






THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



(.. I. Wilson. Reft 22; Card. Mo. 15:357. 

Carter sent G. F. Wilson, probably unnamed, to 

the 1- rticultural Society for testing in 187J; the 

committee on awards gave it a First Class Certificate, 

and named it for the President of the Society. 

It was considered as great an improvement over Ne 
Plus Ultra as the latter was over Hairs Dwarf Mammoth. 
Tho considerably grown in England, France and America, 
which it readied in 1873, it was never as well known as the 
older variety. It was grown at the Station in 1884 and 
again in our recent tests from English seeds, and was also 
studied and described in the U. S. Department of Agri 
culture plat at McMillan. Mich. The three descriptions 
correspond very closely: but pods were better in the later 
tests than in the older ones, and better at McMillan 
than at Geneva. 

Height 2 to 3 feet, with very stout, angular stems, short 
intcrnodes, and numerous heavy medial branches; foliage abundant 

:isc, dark green, large leaflets in 6s, noticeably notched a 
rate toward the tips, and exceedingly large stipules, much whiten 1 
and glaucous. In the old tests whitening and bloom almost com- 
pletely absent, but in the recent ones, at McMillan in particular, 
the foliage showed a distinct bluish cast, from the abundant bloom. 
The very large flowers, white with deep green shading at base, 
begin at the 14th or 15th node, on short stocky peduncles, are often 
paired in old test and at McMillan, n. it in recent Station ' 
pods singly or paired, 2 to 3 inches long in 1884. 3'.| to 3 ;i t inches 
long at Stat i . .n in 1924 and 1925, and 4', to 4 ' •_> inches long at 
M Millan in 1925. broad, quite plump, straight or very slightly 
curved, rounded or blunt at the ends, rather long-rounded in Eng- 
land 1 , with small, recurved tips, deep green in color, and usually 
well filled; peas 4 to 7. large, slightly compressed, oval to oblong, 
medium to dark green. Seeds in the old test mostly cream with 
some pale bluish green, but in recent tests the green seeds largely 
predominated. All were large, indented, compressed or flattened, 
but only moderately wrinkled. 

G. F. Wilson in England was nearly a week earlier 
than Ne Plus Ultra but in America it is as late and no 
more productive. 

Latest of Ml. Refs. 29; Rural N. Y. 12:637. 
1883. Latest of All was introduced about 1882 by 
Sutton. It is said to have been selected by Mayer from 
McLean's Premier. It has been grown in America 
from about two years after its introduction up to the 
present, but never widely. 

Height medium, 2 to 3 feet; stems very stout, with a few 
branches well distributed from base to tip; foliage dark green with 
bluish tint from heavy bloom, with medium sized leaflets, round at 
base of stem and very broad toward top, much larger, rather narrow 
stipules: pods from 15th or 16th node, often paired, 3 to 4 inches 
long, nearly straight, wide, plump or even inflated, blunt ended 
when well filled. As the name indicates, the variety is very late, 
and being only slightly affected by mildew may bear until frost. 

said to be better than Perpetual Bearer, which was introduced 
about the same time, and the latter is said to be better than Bliss 
Everbearing, which, however, falls in another group. 

Autocrat. Refs. 36; Noll Cat. 1907. Autocrat 
was raised by Jas. Veitch before 1885, when it received 
a First Class Certificate from the Royal Horticultural 
Society. It also received an Award of Merit from this 
Society in 1922, when samples were sent for trial by 
nine different growers. It appears to have been first 
advertised for sale in 1888. soon took rank as the best 
very late pea; and still stands high on the list. Late 



peas are not so popular in America, where mildew and 
other diseases interfere with their success, and, altho 
Autocrat is said to be resistant to mildew, it was not 
brought to the United States for 20 years, coming in 1907, 
and has been listed by few seedsmen. Two strains were 
grown in our recent tests, one from British Columbia 
and one from England. The British Columbia strain 
did not mature satisfactorily when sown May 22, but 
gave a pod or two in 12 weeks. 

Plants taller, 3 ' _. feet, than those from English seed, grown 
in a dryer season, 2 ' _• feet; but otherwise appeared the same, of 
Ne Plus Ultra type but good dark green in color. Pods from the 
English seed, sown May 11, were ready in 86 days, were borne 
singly, above the strong, medial branches, on long, heavy stalks. 
The internodes separating the flower-bearing joints elongated 
rapidly as the buds formed, while those below remained short, 
thus changing what appeared like dwarf plants in early season to 
medium height or tall ones as the pods matured. The pods were 
generally 3 ' ■• to 4 ' t inches long, occasionally only 3 inches, broad, 
almost plump, with a tendency to wrinkle, very slightly curved, 
not very well filled, with ends varying from long rounded to almost 
blunt; peas 4 to 6, of Ne Plus Ultra type, dark green and oblong 
or broadly oval, flattened or indented; seeds like those of Ne Plus 
Ultra but with considerably more green. 

.In no. Refs. 43. Ann. Hort. 132. 1893. Juno 
originated with Eckford, and was introduced in 1890, 
coming to the United States in about three years; being 
grown at the Station in 1893 (Bui. 69) for display at 
the World's Fair, yielding very well. It has been quite 
popular in both countries, and is still listed by a dozen 
or more American seedsmen. By some it is held iden- 
tical with Dwarf Champion; but was undoubtedly of 
distinct origin. 

Two strains grown here, from Idaho and British Columbia 
seeds, differed decidedly in size, color and amount of wrinkling of 
the seeds sown, and to some extent in length of pods produced; 
but the seed differences largely disappeared in the harvested samples 
and other differences were lessened in plants of the second season. 
It is a good dwarf Ne Plus Ultra. 2 1 i to 2} 2 feet tall, more branched, 
with darker foliage, otherwise similar, podding a node lower, with 
very similar pods rather better filled with more and smaller peas, 
but in the early Station test these were not considered of high 
quality. 

It was very much like Ne Plus Ultra in season and 
crops. Its classification status is like that of Thomas 
Laxton, below. 

Thomas Laxton. Refs. 52; Dreer Cat. 1902. 
Thomas Laxton originated with the noted horticulturist 
and pea breeder of that name, was introduced in 1898 
and reached the United States in 1900. It was said to 
be a Gradus x Earliest of All cross; but was in many 
respects a Ne Plus Ultra type pea, as the pods are blunt 
or occasionally almost square at the ends, tho usually, 
in the United States at least, somewhat shorter than 
well-grown ones of the type variety. Thomas Laxton 
is also much earlier in season and shorter in stem than 
most others of the group. It might almost equally 
well be included in the blunt -podded section of large- 
podded Dwarf peas. 

In England Laxton is reported as growing, in various localities 
and years, from 3 to 5 feet tall, but usually about 3 feet; while in 
America the limits found have been 1)2 to 3'A feet. In Station 
tests it was from 2*4 to 3 feet tall; stems moderately stout, un- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



73 



branched or with an occasional basal branch; foliage only moderately 
abundant, medium green, of fairly large leaflets of regular shape, 
in 4s, slightly whitened, and almost bloomless, and stipules slightly 
larger than the leaflets, more whitened and with some bloom: 
flowers at 8th or 9th node, pods single, on long stalks neither slender 
nor stocky; quite even, ranging from slightly above to slightly below 
3 inches, with exceptional ones somewhat above or considerably 
below the average, moderately broad only, but very plump, straight, 
well filled, blunt to square at the ends, with small, straight tips; 
peas average 5, very large, tend to wrinkle when still tender, seldom 
indented and between oval and oblong in vertical section; both 
pods and peas medium green in color, rather darker than those of 
Gradus peas medium sized to rather large, mixed cream and green 
in color and well wrinkled. Its season is about that of Gradus, 
some finding it a day or two earlier, others a few days later than that 
variety. It is usually decidedly more productive. 

King Edward (Ref. 58), which is distinct from 
King Edward VII and Edward VII, was introduced in 
1907 by Sutton and has been grown in the United States 
Department of Agriculture tests, and at the University 
of British Columbia, the source of the seeds used in our 
recent tests. 

It is a dwarf Ne Plus Ultra, 3 feet tall; with foliage rather 
more abundant and much darker, with leaflets sometimes notched, 
or " stepped," near the tips; blossoming much higher up on the 
stem, 15th node; pods very large, 3 ' ■> to 4 'a inches long, broad, 
only moderately plump and often deceptive, enlarging before the 
peas are of edible size, usually rather long rounded but occasionally 
almost blunt, as in English descriptions, light in color, smooth and 
pleasing in appearance; peas 6 to 8, large, smooth, oval oblong, 
whitish green. The season is about that of Ne Plus Ultra; and the 
crops under Station conditions were only fair to good; tho in England 
it is recommended as one of the most productive peas. 

Snowdrop (Refs. 56, 57) was introduced by Carter 
before 1908, in which year it received an Award of Merit 
from the Royal Horticultural Society. It is said to be a 
cross between Early Morn and Express, the combination 
resulting in a second early pea of Ne Plus Ultra type. 
Snowdrop was listed in Carter's American catalogs, and 
undoubtedly was grown here to a limited extent; while 
the Early Snowdrop of the second reference is probably 
the same; as Snowdrop, in our tests was among the 
earliest of the Ne Plus Ultra group, pods being ready in 
56 days from plantings of May 11. It was very similar 
to Thos. Laxton with which Early Snowdrop is also 
compared. The leaflets and stipules of Snowdrop were 
smaller than those of Thos. Laxton and lighter in 
color, but the pods and peas were of better color, the 
latter being dark gray-green. The crops were about 
the same, good to very good. 



Routledge Prize (Ref. 62) originated in New 
Zealand and was brought to America in 1918 by Rout- 
ledge. As grown here: 

Rather short-stemmed (2'£ to 3 feet), unbranched, foliage 
almost scanty, medium green, of large broad leaflets and much 
larger, deeply clasping stipules, both decidedly whitened; flowers 
single, white, from 16th node; pods on stocky stalks of medium 
length, fully half an inch longer than those of Ne Plus Ultra (3J^ to 
4' s inches i, very plump, and without distinct tips, but otherwise 
of the same shape and similar in color ; peas 8 or 9, very large, 
indented, oblong, medium green in color and of very good quality; 
seeds almost indistinguishable from those of Thos. Laxton, but 
with a bluish shade overspreading the cream color and modifying 
the green. Routledge Prize was a few days earlier than Ne Plus 
Ultra and one of the best croppers of the group. 

Sutton Alliance (Ref. 63) was introduced by 
Sutton in 1920; and has been grown at this Station from 
the originator's and Idaho Station seed. 

Plants rather dwarf, 2} 4 ' to 2 Ji feet, of Ne Plus Ultra type, 
sparingly branched and with abundant dark, bluish green foliage; 
pods smooth, 3 ' 2 to 4 ' s inches long, broader than those of Ne 
Plus Ultra, often enlarged at the tips and with rounded to blunt 
ends and short, wide tips, attractive medium green, not filling well 
under our conditions, usually showing many abortive peas; peas 
3 to 7 or more, exceedingly large, very smooth-surfaced, round- 
oval or oblong in shape and not compressed or indented, dark green; 
seeds very large, mixed cream and green as sown but nearly all 
green as harvested, and almost dimpled or coarsely wrinkled. 
The crop was as late or later than that of Ne Plus Ultra, and only 
fair under our conditions, as the pods were never paired, tho said 
to be more often paired than single in England. 

Another Alliance is described in the Wrinkled, 
Cream-seeded group. 

Liberty (Ref. 64) was introduced by Sharpe about 
1921; and has probably not been grown in the United 
States except at the Idaho Station, here, and on United 
States Department of Agriculture plats. The plants are 
hardly of Ne Plus Ultra type: 

Height under 3 feet; stems stout, usually with basal branches; 
foliage dense, very dark blue green, not whitened, with non-char- 
acteristic leaflets in 6s and much larger, deeply clasping, sharp- 
tipped, stipules, finely serrate to above the middle; pods start at 
the 15th node, on long very heavy stalks, singly or in pairs, the 
longest of any described for the Ne Plus Ultra group, usually 4J4 
to 4l<j inches, occasionally only 3 3 4 or almost 5 inches, tending to 
curve slightly, but otherwise of Ne Plus Ultra type, very dark in 
color with heavy bloom; peas 5 to 7 or more, also very dark green, 
smooth, round and not indented, oval in vertical section and smaller 
than most of those in the group; seeds of medium size, dimpled to 
coarsely wrinkled, largely cream in color. Liberty was in season 
with Ne Plus Ultra, pods ready in about 10 weeks from sowing May 
10; and gave a good yield. 



TELEPHONE GROUP 



Probably no other group of modern peas consists of 
so many varieties so similar in type as that based on 
Telephone. Little " ancient history " of the group can 
be given, since Telephone itself is a selection, only, from 
a cross-bred pea, Telegraph, neither of whose reputed 
parents resembles Telephone ; therefore it would be with- 
out significance to follow either line back. 

Sutton's Goliah, or Goliath, may have been a 
Telephone -like pea, as is the pea so named much later 
grown in America. If so, it is probably the oldest of 
the group. 



Laxton Superlative, a variety a few years older than 
Telephone, appears to be the first one very similar to it, 
tho of entirely different breeding. It undoubtedly 
entered, directly or indirectly, into the make-up of 
several of the succeeding large-podded additions to the 
Telephone group. In the following discussion of varie- 
ties, Superlative is first described, briefly, by comparison 
with Telephone. The latter variety so closely corre- 
sponds to most of the other varieties in the group that it, 
alone, is described in detail, the others being connected 
with this fundamental description by similarities, or 



74 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



separated from it by differences. The resemblance of 
the varieties in this group starts with the seeds, which in 
practically all are large-, well wrinkled and cream and 
green in color. In an examination of the 1928 crops on 
the Arlington Farm plats of the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture, using five pods selected as typical from each 
of about 15 varieties of this group. Col. C. B. Sayre of 
this Station and the senior author could find no constant 
separately differences. The pods so varied in the variety 
or were so much alike in different varieties, in shape, 
size and color, that it would have been impossible to 
distinguish one variety from another by these selected 
pods; and it would have been very easy to have chosen 
from a considerable quantity of the pods of any variety, 
similar groups of five pods showing as great differences. 
The various differences were much less than strain differ- 
ences in many well-known varieties in other groups. 
In our tests, in a few cases, as with Amateur Pride and 
The V. C, the seeds sown were all cream colored with- 
out trace of green, but the harvested seeds were either 
all light green or mingled cream and green. It is possible 
that a few varieties, like Gradus, now placed in the 
Wrinkled, Cream-seeded group, might be placed in the 
Telephone group, but usually any large podded peas 
placed in the cream-seeded group differed from Tele- 
phone in other characters than seed. 

Laxton Superlative. Refs. 1; Gard. Chron. 
1199. 1872: Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 12:35. 1890; 
Rural N. Y. .{1:365. 1872; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 
11:85. 1873: Thorburn Car. 1873: N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:244. 1885. Superlative originated prior to 1871 
with Laxton, and was advertised for sale in that year by 
Hurst. Early references to it say it was the result of a 
double cross between Ne Plus Ultra and an unnamed pea 
whose parents were Laxton Supreme and a second 
unnamed sort. This may have been Tall White Sugar, 
since Laxton said, later, that Superlative had in it the 
" blood " of a tall sugar pea, which gave it its large and 
too often " puffy " and poorly filled pods, but which 
made it useful in breeding new varieties for pod size. 
Superlative was later handled by other English seed 
firms, was noticed by an American periodical in 1871, 
and was introduced here in the next year — very 
prompt action, induced undoubtedly by the remarkable 
size of Superlative's pods, which, in England, were 
sometimes 7 inches long. 

It was grown at this Station in 1884, as was Tele- 
phone, from the records of which tests the following 
points of difference from Telephone are taken, char- 
acters for Superlative being given first: 

Height 3 to 5 feet, 3 to 4 feet: rarely branched, sometimes 
branched: stalks 1 to 2' i inches long, 1 to 4 inches; pods single, 

paired: pod length often 4 inches, 3 to 4 inches; pods very 
plump or inflated, pods sometimes slightly inflated: peas 5 to 8, 
4 to 9: seeds mostly cream colored, seeds varying from almost white 
to pale green; seeds roundish and scarcely indented, shriveled and 
indented; seeds 80 per ounce. 87; not prolific, prolific: rather late, 
rr.i'ivav-n H -. ^ •-, •- ■':.• f Bag] m lorgl . broad, pal'. [**ls 
sometimes 7 inches long, irregular in outline, much curved, pointed. 
often poorly filled. 

Laxton Superlative has probably not been grown 



in either England or America during the present cen- 
tury, so cannot be confused with Sutton Superlative, 
introduced in 1906, tho both come in the Telephone 
group. 

Telephone. Refs. 2-9; Rural N. Y. 10:272. 
1881 . Telephone was a sport from Telegraph or resulted 
from an accidental cross in it, and was selected from that 
variety about 1878 by Carter. It soon became very 
widely distributed in England; and after 1881, in Amer- 
ica. Telegraph had as its parents Veitch Perfection and 
Laxton Prolific Long-pod, one having wrinkled, the other 
dimpled peas. Telegraph followed Laxton Prolific and 
produced dimpled peas; but must have had, as a recessive 
character, the wrinkling shown by Veitch Perfection, 
which reappeared in Telephone. Both Telegraph and 
Telephone showed marked increase in pod size, probably 
due to the added vigor so often noted in cross-bred 
seedlings. However induced, both peas had the long, 
broad pods characteristic of so many modern peas 
which had previously been shown, in the type with 
pointed or long-rounded ends, only by Laxton Super- 
lative or some of the edible-pod peas, with which neither 
Telegraph nor Telephone have any apparent connection. 
Telephone was not well fixed in character when first 
disseminated, showing great variations in color of fcliage 
and of pods, some of the selected strains from it being 
continued under the same name, with or without quali- 
fying adjectives, others receiving new names, thus 
giving a very intricate synonymy. This diversity of 
strains makes it impossible to say definitely what char- 
acters or what degrees of slightly variant characters 
marked the first Telephone; but it is certain that it was 
lighter in color, both of foliage and pod, than most of 
the strains now sold under the name of Telephone. 
Some of the characters of an early strain are noted in the 
comparison between this variety and Laxton Superla- 
tive. Several strains have been grown in our recent 
tests; and from these, particularly from the lightest 
colored strain, the following quite detailed description 
is given: 

Seed quite uniform in general appearance, much wrinkled, 
oval to oblong across the pod axis, indented along the axis, some 
being almost cylindrical, quite large 104 to the ounce , greenish 
cream and light yellowish green in color, over greenish yellow 
cotyledons, with radicles obscure: plants 4}£ to 5 feet tall, trailing 
so that support is necessary, of vigorous growth; stems moderately 
stout, rather coarse, angular, quite smooth on the surface, with 
long internodes, rarely branched, but occasionally showing a few 
slender basal branches; foliage abundant, medium green in color, 
with little bloom on leaflets but some on stipules; leaflets usually 4, 
rarely 6, large to medium in size, broad; stipules deeply clasping 
stem, slightly larger than the leaflets, with sharp tips and teeth 
half way to the tip. of same basal color as leaflets but much more 
whitened; tendrils not characteristic; flowers begin about the 12th 
node, almost always single, not characteristic; pods single, on long, 
slender stalks, with large to medium-sized receptacles and straight, 
not characteristic sepals. 3 '4 to 4' 2 inches long, mostly between 
3} j to 4', inches, moderately broad, plump, somewhat wrinkled 
when ready for picking: straight, with long, almost parallel sides, 
without constrictions between the peas, usually well filled to the 
edge but not well filled to the pointed or long-rounded ends, which 
sometimes show also a dorsal slope toward the point, same in color 
or lighter than the foliage, hardly medium green; peas 7 to 9, very 




A Stratagem-type pea 



DWARF DEFIANCE 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




An edible-podded type 



GIANT SUGAR 



'Nearly natural size 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



75 



large, round oval, smooth surfaced, medium green, of very good, 
but not quite best quality. When sown on May 11th the first 
Telephone pods were ready to pick in 65 days, earlier sowings 
requiring about a week longer and later sowings, which brought 
ripening into hot weather, needed 10 days less. In no case were 
our crops better than " good," an average yield for peas of this 
type: but different strains varied somewhat in yield. Improved 
Telephone and Improved Dark-podded Telephone differed from 
the name-strains in slightly more uniform and darker colored pods 
and better colored peas. 

Tall Telephone (seed from British Columbia) proved 
true to the name, the stems being 6 feet long; but the 
pods began much higher on the vine (21st node), were 
much smaller, more like those of Advancer, and were 
nearly a week later in maturing. The Tall Telephone 
of Aggeler 8b Musser is apparently only Telephone, in 
distinction from Dwarf Telephone, which they also list. 

Duke of Albany. Refs. 14-17; Rural N. Y. 
l.'i: 544. 1884. Duke of Albany traces, as does Tele- 
phone, to Telegraph, being the result of a cross between 
that variety and Hallamshire Hero (unknown in Amer- 
ica*, made before 1882 by Abbott. It soon gained a 
prominent place in England, reached the United States 
in two years and became well known under its own 
name or that of America Champion; and it also met 
some favor in France. It is still known in all three 
countries, but is being superseded by other varieties 
that are more productive. It received an Award of 
Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1901 
and 1916 but was not given one in 1921. 

As grown here it is exceedingly like Telephone, but rather 
shorter-stemmed; the pods average larger and are much more 
uniform: and the peas and seeds are very large, the latter running 
84 to the ounce which number measures 44.5 cubic centimeters 
as compared with 104 to the ounce measuring 41 cubic centimeters 
for Telephone. Both pods and peas are slightly better colored 
than the ordinary, or old, Telephone. The season is the same and 
the yield no better, if as good. 

Admiral Dewey. Refs. 19; Gregory Car. 1904. 
Admiral Dewey originated with Allan, who had two 
or three vines of it in 1884, the original plant, according 
to Gregory, a friend of Allan, having been found as a 
chance seedling among a lot of peas received from Eng- 
land. The marked resemblance of the pea to Telephone 
would indicate that this find was a variant specimen of 
that variety from which a strain was developed very 
free from sports, rather shorter-stemmed than Tele- 
phone, and with longer and greener pods and greener 
peas and seeds. 

In our tests Admiral Dewey (not from the originator's seed) 
appears to have degenerated to some extent, being taller than when 
introduced 5 ! 2 feeti and taller than Telephone, and with shorter, 
rather than longer pods, and pods and peas of the same or lighter 
color. The stem was more branched than that of Telephone, 
having occasional long medial branches, and the pods were some- 
times in pairs making Admiral Dewey decidedly the better cropper 
of the two. 

Victory. Refs. 20-22; Landreth Cat. 1897; letter 
from J. Bolgiano Seed Co., Jan. 27, 1927. Sharpe 
Victory received a First Class Certificate from the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1886, which was probably 
shortly before its introduction. It apparently was slow 
in coming to America, our first reference to it being 10 



years later but it was considerably grown for a time. 
One reference says it was of the Shropshire Hero class, 
but earlier and better sources speak of pods whose 
size and shape ally the variety with Telephone, although 
much shorter and stouter in stem and with many 
branches. The pods were evidently fully as long and as 
broad as those of Telephone, and long-rounded ends, 
and were bright green. It was a late midseason pea. 

In 1918, Hurst sent to the Royal Horticultural 
Society for testing a Victory pea, quite different from 
Sharpe Victory, and corresponding much more closely 
with Telephone in vine and pod. Hurst does not list 
a Victory in his catalogs of 1919 or more recent ones nor 
have we found any other English reference to a Victory 
of this type. 

In 1920, J. Bolgiano announced as a new creation 
a pea bearing this name, which came from a few vines 
found among the crops of one of the late tall-growing 
varieties of English origin. As grown here, this corre- 
sponds almost perfectly to the Victory first noted ; altho 
said to have no connection with that variety. 

It is rather later than Telephone, with slightly shorter stems 
and decidedly shorter joints, more often branched, pods begin 
higher on stem ( 1 7th node I , are nearly half an inch longer than those 
of Telephone and more uniform, often slightly curved at the points, 
with thicker walls and rougher surface, rounded rather than pointed 
ends, rather better in color and with peas decidedly greener. The 
crops varied somewhat but in the last season of testing the yield 
was much better than that of Telephone. 

Alderman. Refs. 29-32; Burpee Cat. 1901. 
Alderman was introduced by Laxton about 1891, and 
is probably a selection from Duke of Albany, with more 
branched plants, larger and better colored, and better 
filled pods and greener peas. It was introduced to the 
United States by Burpee before 1901, and is still listed 
by several seedsmen. As grown here, it was better 
than Telephone, excelling it in the points mentioned 
above, and yielded much better than Duke of Albany, 
although the pods of the strain we grew were no larger. 
Pods and peas were both decidedly darker in color. 

Duke of York. Refs. 35, 36. Cooper-Taber 
introduced Duke of York in 1892. It is probably a 
selection, without crossing, from Duke of Albany. It 
received a First Class Certificate from the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society in 1892 and an Award of Merit in 1893, 
but was not considered worthy of an award when shown 
in 1918. It reached the United States about 5 years 
after its introduction and was listed by several seedsmen, 
but did not win a permanent place, as it was not found 
in 1922 catalogs and so was not grown here. 

It was said to be about a week earlier and much dwarfer than 
Telephone, 2j^-4 feet, flowered from 14th node and above, with 
pods much like those of Telephone, no better in color but with peas 
of higher quality. It was said, in England, not to run to small 
pods or to suffer from drouth as did Telephone and Duke of Albany; 
but by at least one large grower in America was found to sport 
badly. 

It is apparently repeated, with some improved 
characteristics, in Admiral Beatty. 

Boston Unrivalled. Refs. 44; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 
85:4. 1900; Burpee Car. 1904. This pea was named 



76 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



from Boston. Eng.. the home of John, who introduced it 
in 1895. It was tested by the South Dakota Station in 
1903. for the U. S. Department of Agriculture, and was 
commercially listed in 1904. It seems to have com- 
peted with Duke of Albany in both England and Amer- 
ica, the earlier pea probably showing some signs of dete- 
rioration which were lacking in the new strain. It 
,ed very commendatory notice from the Royal 
cultural Society. It was considered almost insepa- 
rable from Duke of Albany in its early days and as grown 
lure recently appears to differ from it only in slightly 
shorter, less uniform, slenderer pods and smaller peas 
and seeds. It was not as well colored as Duke of Albany. 
in either pods or peas, but was. possibly, a little better in 
yield. Except for its rather slenderer pods it could pass 
anywhere as Telephone. 

Prodigious Refs. 58, 59) apparently originated 
with Cooper -Taber. being introduced by them as Prince 
Edward in 1901 after some preliminary exhibiting at 
English shows, and simultaneously in America under 
the name Prodigious by Maule. 

It was grown at this Station under both names, 
and the two strains seemed to differ in height of vines, 
Prodigious being several inches shorter, but flowering 
a node higher. These differences, however, were no 
more marked than pod, pea, seed and vine variations 
between the three strains of Prince Edward grown from 
seed from the University of British Columbia and two 
American seedsmen. The evidence does not overthrow 
the claim that the Prodigious and Prince Edward were 
identical when introduced; but merely confirms the 
conclusion that any variety of peas grown by different 
seedsmen, both making careful selection but with 
different ideals, will soon differ decidedly, both from 
each other and from the original stock grown without 
selection or roguing. 

Averaging the characteristics and measurements 
of the three strains of Prince Edward and one of Pro- 
digious it would seem that the double-named variety is 
much like Telephone, or perhaps more like Alderman, 
but with shorter pods, not longer, which are borne on 
more rigid stalks than those of either variety. The 

SENATOR 
The seeds of peas in this group are all well wrinkled, 
and with one or two exceptions contain both cream- 
colored and green-colored forms in varying proportions. 
One or two varieties have all cream or all green seeds. 
Many varieties of this type antedate Senator, but 
are less known than that variety and often vary con- 
siderably from it in width of pod, which is intermediate 
between the narrow, slender-pod Evergreen and the 
broad one of Heroine. In general, the group corresponds, 
in the wrinkled peas, to the Scimitar group in smooth 
peas, in having noticeably curved pods. As Senator 
best represents the group, it is first described, in some 
detail, though chronologically, as the other varieties are 
arranged, it should follow several of them. 

S» nator. Refs. 9. 10: Burpee Cat. 1904. Sen- 
ator originated with Webb previous to 1894 as a Prince 



season is the same, and the Prodigious strain gave better 
crops, the others no better than Telephone. 

Quite Content. Refs. 66, 67; Burpee Cat. 1910. 
Quite Content, when introduced by Carter in 1906 was 
undoubtedly the largest podded pea in existence; and 
the name bespeaks the introducers' satisfaction with 
their achievement. The variety came from an Alder- 
man x Edwin Becket cross, and is similar in most 
respects to Alderman, but with much longer pods, 
parallel -sided, fully as broad and plump, but from their 
greater length appearing more slender. It was brought 
to America in 1910 and quite widely distributed; but 
like so many English peas of exhibition type, has generally 
proved disappointing. Grown at the Station, from the 
American introducer's seeds, it has been no better than 
Telephone. 

\. C. Refs. 86; Marshall Cat. 1918. Like Quite 
Content, of which it is an improvement, V. C. was 
introduced in 1916 by Sutton as " the largest podded 
pea in commerce." It reached America very soon, being 
listed in 1918, but has been disappointing, like most 
English peas of the extremely large-podded type. As 
grown at the Station, from the English introducers' seed, 
its pods occasionally reached, or even exceeded, 5 inches 
in length, but were too few in number and too poorly 
filled to satisfy the grower. The pods are, however, 
of good color and the peas the largest of any grown here. 
It is tall of vine and late in season. 

idmiral Beatty. Refs. 94; Stumpp & Walter 
Car. 1922. Admiral Beatty was raised by Laxton before 
1920 when it received an Award of Merit from the 
Royal Horticultural Society. It was brought to the 
United States in 1922. It is said to have come from a 
Gradus x Alderman cross; and is intermediate in many 
ways between its two parents and an improvement on 
Alderman. 

With us it grew from 3 to 4 feet tall, with a slender, seldom 
branched stem, abundant medium green foliage of which the leaf- 
lets were square tipped, but stipules pointed. It flowered at the 
12th node and the resulting pods were rarely more than 4 inches 
long but otherwise like those of Alderman. The peas were fewer 
in number and not as large. The season was decidedly earlier and 
the crop better than that of either Alderman or Gradus. 

GROUP 

of Wales x Culverwell Giant Marrow cross. It has 
been widely distributed in England, and perhaps more 
widely in the United States, where it was introduced in 
1904, and is known in France. It has been grown here 
from seed from three sources, one lot said to be Improved 
Senator. No considerable differences were noted, but 
the improved type was stouter-stemmed, more branched, 
bore more paired pods, and gave a better yield of pods, 
which however were not as well filled as those of one of 
the other strains, nor were the peas as large. The 
seeds of the Improved Senator were more wrinkled, 
smaller and all green, but the peas were of no better color 
than those from the mixed cream and green lots. 
The general description of Senator follows: 

Seeds moderately large. 110-120 to the ounce, only moderately 
wrinkled, cream and, largely, light green, round oval, indented. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



77 



sometimes nearly cylindrical, with obscure radicles, and yellowish 
green or green cotyledons; plants vigorous, 2}i to 3 feet tall; stems 
slender, trailing stout and more erect in improved strain I, angular; 
foliage abundant, medium to dark green, consisting of even colored, 
non-characteristic leaflets in 4s (sometimes 2s) and large, deeply 
clasping, glaucous, whitened stipules with sharp tips and teeth 
from base well toward tip; flowers from 9th node, or above, white, 
not specially characteristic, on rigid stalks of medium length and 
thickness, usually single, but occasionally in pairs; pods single or 
paired, 3 ' 2 to 4 inches long, of medium width, plump, moderately 
to much curved, with long-rounded points and very small tips or 
none, medium to dark green in color, usually well filled; peas 6 to 
8, very' large, smooth, round or slightly indented, oblong from hilum 
to tip, of good medium green color. The season of Senator with 
us was fully as early as that of Advancer, if not earlier, but it is 
usually considered somewhat later. 

Shropshire Hero. Refs. 7; Gregory Cat. 1890. 
Shropshire Hero originated with Eckford before 1885, 
and reached the United States in 1890, where it has, 
from printed records at least, been more widely and 
more favorably known than in England or in France. 
From general similarity, it appears either a selection 
from Yorkshire Hero or the result of a cross with that 
variety as a parent. It differs from Yorkshire Hero 
in having more or less curved pods, so resembles Senator ; 
tho the pods are more blunt at the ends than others of 
the group. When grown at the Station in 1893, Shrop- 
shire Hero was pronounced a vigorous half-dwarf 
variety giving heavy crops of large pods and good sized 
peas of first quality. 

In recent tests, the variety differed from Senator in being 
stouter stemmed, with darker, very glaucous foliage, long leaflets, 
and proportionately smaller, less serrate and less whitened stipules; 
pods shorter and broader, rounded to blunt at the ends; peas much 
fewer and larger, more oval or oblong across the pod and more 
flattened the othtr way; seeds distinctly indented, flattened, very 
large, weighing 87 to the ounce. It was ready with Senator and 
gave good crops. 

Heroine. Refs. 8; Gregory Car. 1890. Early 
records of Heroine are almost identical with those of 
Shropshire Hero: Originated with Eckford, but in 
1889, reached America in 1890 and more popular here 
than in England. It received more favorable notice in 
France, however, than did Shropshire Hero. At this 
Station, in 1893, it was said to be dwarf, and best of its 
class. 

From printed descriptions, and as grown here recently, it is 
about a foot shorter than Shropshire Hero, more often branched 
at the base; foliage considerably lighter colored, with less numerous 
and shorter leaflets, sometimes serrate along upper edges, and large 
stipules having teeth to above the middle; pods single, from about 
the 13th node, and, except for the slight curve that links them with 
Senator, much like those of Telephone. It is later than Shropshire 
Hero and decidedly later than Senator, and gave nearly as good 
crops as the latter, which, with the larger size of the pods, makes it 
E desirable variety. 

Eureka. Refs. 11, 12; Am. Gard. 19:202. 
1898. Eureka resulted from an unknown cross made 
by Culverwell some years before 1894 and improved by 
selection previous to its introduction in that year by 
Sutton. Reports in an American journal show that 
Eureka was grown in this country in 1898, but we have 
not found it regularly listed. It was grown at this 
Station from the introducer's seed and from seed grown 
at the Idaho Station. The English seeds were much 



larger, gave slightly taller vines and longer pods starting 
higher up the stem; but other differences were very slight. 
Later than Senator, 2j^ to 3 feet tall, pods single, from 11th 
to 14th node, 3}4 to 4j^ inches long, broader than those of Senator, 
less curved, of about the same color; peas 6-8, those from English 
seed nearly one-fourth larger, but difference in size much less in 
original seeds; pods sometimes deceptive, the plumpness shown 
not always being due to the peas, as is the case with Senator. The 
crops were not as good as those of Senator. 

Sutton's Best of All, introduced in 1900, is a dark- 
podded form of Eureka, in which the pods are also 
somewhat less curved. Sutton's Best of All was prob- 
ably introduced in America about 1909; but as the name 
is identical with that of a much older McLean pea (see 
p. 61), known to have been in the United States for 
many years, it is impossible to speak positively on this 
point. The seed from which we grew the Sutton pea 
came from British Columbia; and the variety, except in 
the points mentioned, was very similar to Eureka grown 
from English seed. 

Gladstone. Refs. 15; Burnett Car. 1913. Glad- 
stone was raised by Holmes before 1896, when the Royal 
Horticultural Society gave it most favorable notice and 
again honored a selected strain of it in 1912. It was 
probably this strain, or one still further selected, that 
came to the United States in 1913. The variety seemed 
exceedingly variant at first, as many references speak of 
two or more types or strains, of which the true one had 
curved pods that place it in the Senator group. As 
grown here, it had changed somewhat from the true 
type, as the pods were decidedly wider than those of 
Senator with the slight curve mostly toward the tip. 

Plants rather taller than those of Senator, with stouter stems; 
foliage slightly lighter colored, leaflets usually in 6s, rather larger 
and broader, stipules proportionately smaller and less whitened; 
pods rarely or never paired, decidedly broader, less curved, more 
pointed, and with smoother surface; peas, when pods were ready to 
pick, smaller, not filling the pods as well, but of better quality than 
those of Senator, possibly because the appearance of the pods 
induced comparatively earlier picking, although the season was 
several days later; seeds somewhat larger. It was not as produc- 
tive as Senator. 

Delicatesse (Petit Pois, wrinkled). Refs. 18-21. 

The origin of the wrinkled, green-seeded type of Petit 
Pois peas is uncertain; but we first find it listed as Petit 
Pois (Delicatesse) by Carter, about 1901 ; and what is 
apparently the same pea came to us, indirectly, from 
Holland, as Delicates, and from an American seedsman 
as Petit Pois; while the Germans list Delicatesse Mark- 
erbsen. Carter says Delicatesse is very popular in 
Continental countries, and the name would indicate 
French origin; but whether the wrinkled type of Petit 
Pois originated in England and went to France, or 
vice versa, is not clear. 

The Clark strain of Petit Pois, which we grew, was 
developed from a trial ground sample grown from English 
seed. 

The plants are of Senator type, rather shorter in 
stem, with rather more and larger leaflets, and in the 
Petit Pois strain more branched and with more paired 
pods. The pods are shorter by nearly half an inch and 
slenderer than those of Senator and the peas are as 



78 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



numerous, therefore much smaller. The " Delicates " 
strain was slightly later than Senator and the Petit 
Pois strain a full week later, both being quite as 
productive. 

In 1908 Carter received from the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society an Award of Merit for his Evergreen 
pea which was not given when the variety 
was grown in 1925. This is a slightly dwarfer form of 
Petit Pois Delicatesae with larger and deeper green 
pods. In 1913. perhaps earlier. Carter listed Giant 
Delicatesae, which is taller, as prolific as Delicatesse and 
with much longer pods. These have not been tried here, 
nor, so far as we know, grown in America, tho Carter 
maintained an American branch for several years and 
probably distributed both of them. 



In 1912 Sutton introduced an Improved Petit Pois, 
with green, wrinkled seeds, sending a sample of the 
stock to Rice. The pea breeders of that company, 
by selecting and roguing, built up from this English 
variety a very uniform strain for canners' use, which 
was introduced about ten years ago as Rice No. 13. 
In the hands of other seedsmen somewhat variant strains 
of this pea have developed. 

It is generally from 2' 4 to 2}i feet tall, with stem and foliage 
very much like that of Senator, but flowering lower on the stem, 
about 12th node, producing some paired pods, medium green in 
color, .!') to 4 inches long, distinctly curved, about as broad as 
those of Senator and broader than Petit Pois, which are well filled 
with small peas, grading well when ready to can, of fair color and 
good quality. In our tests it did not yield as well as Admiral and 
was a few days later. 



EDIBLE PODDED GROUP 



Edible-podded peas have been known almost from 
the first record of them, as Sugar peas, tho the peas 
themselves are little, if any, sweeter than those of 
cream-seeded Extra Earlies, and contain far less sugar 
than wrinkled peas. The varieties of the group are used 
in a way impossible with other kinds; as the pods of 
these varieties, lack, at all stages of growth, the fibrous, 
indigestible, inner, parchment-like lining of the valves — 
the endocarp — which makes the pods of other peas, 
even when boiled, impossible to masticate or digest. 
In edible-pod peas the endocarp is lacking, or so reduced 
in fiber content that the entire pod, with the immature 
peas, cooks tender and may be used exactly as are the 
pods of snap beans. Not only is the endocarp reduced or 
missing, but the mesocarp becomes thickened, fleshy 
and juicy, giving a " body " to the pod very different 
from the thin, shell-like structure of the pods of other 
peas. 

The Edible -podded group of varieties has, it is 
believed, an earlier history than any other distinct group 
unless it be Field peas. Ruellius, 1536, wrote of peas of 
which the fresh pods and peas were eaten, 1 Gerarde in 
1597 gave a figure of the straight-podded type of Sugar 
peas, and Worlidge in 1683 pictured the crooked-podded 
type. Before Worlidge, in 1629, Parkinson mentions 
Sugar peas, possibly the white-seeded type, and " Pease 
without skins," which may be the form derived from the 
Field pea, with colored seeds; and the catalog of Fuller, 
Tracy, Blackwell, London, 1688, lists Large White, 
Small White, and Grey Sugar peas. 

Unfortunately for the horticultural systematist, 
definite names for varieties of Edible-podded peas are 
few, and the descriptions are so lacking in detail that it 
is now out of the question to trace the history of the 
varieties, or to co-ordinate names and synonyms. The 
scarcity of identifying names in the Edible-pod group 
does not mean any lack of names or of synonyms; but 
the designations given to varieties were combinations 
of descriptive terms ranging from the simplicity of Sugar 
to such nomenclatural monstrosities as Extra Early 

These may. however, not have been parchment-less pods; 
possibly be eaten. 



Extremely Dwarf Small-podded Sugar, the combinations 
being so varied, so involved, and so often repeated with 
slight change, that only confusion results from collecting 
them. The situation is still further complicated by the 
passing of varieties back and forth between the Nether- 
lands, Belgium, France, Germany, and England, each 
journey usually adding one or more new names, or syno- 
nyms. Later, America also contributed to the tangle 
by originating varieties; and usually followed the old 
descriptive-adjective style in naming them. 

Two distinct sections of the Edible-podded group 
can, however, be separated with much certainty, as peas 
with pods lacking the parchment-like lining developed 
both from the white-flowered varieties of Pisum sati- 
vum var. hortense, with cream-colored seeds; and from 
the red and white or purple and white flowered varieties 
of the field pea, P. sativum var. arvense, with dark 
seeds, either self-colored or spotted. Of these two 
groups, the varieties with light colored flowers and seeds 
are the more agreeable to English and American palates, 
tho both types can be eaten in early stages without 
distaste; but in Continental countries the dark-seeded 
forms are fully as numerous and the rather rough, wild 
taste seems not unpleasing to the consumers. Varieties 
of either type are not very much in demand, except 
locally, in the United States or England; but are widely 
used, tho not extensively, in mid-Continental and Scan- 
dinavian countries. 

Owing to the confusion of names and synonyms, 
lack of histories, and the variation in descriptions, dates 
and measurements under different conditions, about all 
that can be done in arrangement is to place in a sub- 
group, under some fairly representative descriptive name, 
those varieties that are of the same approximate height, 
habit, size of pod, and season, since such varietal names 
as Alaska, British Queen and Advancer, found in other 
groups of peas to serve as types, are very few in the 
Edible-pod group. 

Thickened pod walls characterize the whole group 
of Edible pod peas, whatever the color of flowers or seeds. 

but merely very young pods of smooth-seeded peas, which could 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



79 



In most cases, also, the pods are much wider and flatter 
than those of other peas, loment-like, that is, constricted 
between the peas, similar to pods of the honey -locust, 
and usually more or less curved laterally, twisted and 
distorted. The peas are found near one edge of the pod, 
often extending only half or less of the width of the pod, 
the halves of the pod beyond the pea being in contact 
but rarely adherent. In consequence one border of the 
pod is plump or nearly so, the other almost flat. This 



is especially true of the larger-podded types, these char- 
acteristics being decreasingly less marked in smaller- 
podded kinds. In the so-called " butter " peas, thicken- 
ing or " fleshiness " of the wall, with lack of parchment 
lining, only, separates the pods from those of other peas, 
the constrictions between the peas and the flat margins 
disappearing almost completely, as well as the tendency to 
distortion ; so that such pods are straight or slightly curved, 
and plump, cylindrical, or even thicker than broad. 



VARIETIES IN EDIBLE-PODDED GROUP 



WHITE-FLOWERED, CREAM SEEDED SECTION 
Very Dwarf White Sugar. Refs. 1122. The 
peas in this first sub-section might be still further sepa- 
rated by classing a few as " extremely dwarf " or " Tom 
Thumb " Sugar peas, which would include the Early 
Dwarf Dutch, or Very Dwarf Dutch Frame of 
Vilmorin, the Very Dwarf White Sugar of Henderson, 
the Very Early Dwarf (Edible Pod) of this Station, and 
the Extra Early Very Dwarf Edible Pod of Gregory, 
all of which, if more than one variety, were less than 
one foot tall as grown in the United States. These 
varieties were connected by interlocking synonyms with 
others in this sub-group and even with those in groups 
generally very much taller. 

The descriptions of these very dwarf varieties agree as to stocky, 
very short -jointed, zigzag stems, branched at the base and occasion- 
ally above, with rather scanty, deep green foliage, paired or single 
pods from the 8th to 10th node and above, which are 2 to 2 3 4 inches 
long, rarely 3 inches, narrow, only slightly constricted or loment- 
like, margined, and whitish green in color. All were very early or 
early, and apparently varied in productivity. 

Of varieties 1 to 2 feet tall, the following may be 
named as grown or known in the United States, but not 
definitely separable: Very Dwarf White Sugar of 
Stumpp 8b Walter; Common Dwarf Crooked Sugar 
of Lawson; Early Dwarf Dutch Sugar or Early Dwarf 
Dc Grace, and Common Dwarf Sugar or Dwarf 
Crooked Podded Sugar of Burr; Dwarf Royal Edible 
Pod and Edible Podded Dwarf of this Station; Dwarf 
White Blossom Sugar of Landreth; Dwarf White 
Sugar of this Station, Dreer and Brown, and Swiss 
of Pacific Coast seedsmen. 

Vines taller than of those varieties listed in the first paragraph 
mark all of those in this group, with pods of same size or even 
smaller, rarely larger, and apparently loment-like for all except 
Edible Podded Dwarf. 

Dwarf Capucin, a variety from the Netherlands, 
Belgium or northern France, belongs in the group, and 
apparently maintains its identity. 

It appears most to resemble Edible-podded Dwarf, but has 
shorter stalks and pods, and the latter are constricted, rather 
strongly recurved, and with long-rounded rather than blunt ends. 

Dwarf White Sugars. Refs. 23-35, 40. In gen- 
eral, the varieties in this sub-section are from 2 to 3 feet 
tall, but may vary decidedly, in either direction, under 
differing conditions. The leading names are Dwarf 
White Sugar of Thorburn and Rice; Prince Bismarck, 
Nippon Saya, Extra Early Dwarf Brittany, Dwarf 
Sugar of Sinclair (1826) and Hovey (1859); Ledman's 



Dwarf; Dwarf Early Sugar of Thorburn; and Dwarf 
Debarbieux. 

Dwarf White Sugar of Thorburn, grown at the 
Station in 1882 and that of Rice, grown recently, were 
similar in height, and not unlike in pod length. 

Height about 2'^ to lYi feet; pods of the Thorburn strain 
2 l /2 to 3 inches long and of the Rice strain 2 )-£ to 2 3 ± inches, but those 
of the older strain were quite irregular, often much constricted, 
contorted and pointed, thoon some plants straight and blunt-ended; 
while those of the Rice strain were all straight, constricted and blunt. 

Prince Bismarck was grown here in 1887 and again 
in recent tests. 

Exceedingly early, very small podded, especially in the later 
tests, but productive; pods straight, slightly constricted, plump, of 
fine flavor and texture when cooked. It was about 2J4 feet tall. 

Nippon Saya is a Japanese variety of which seed 
came to us from the U. S. Department of Agriculture 
plats at McMillan, Michigan. 

Height lYi feet tall, with much longer pods, 3 to 3j/£ inches, 
broad, with wide wing, laterally curved and pointed at the ends. 

Extra Early Dwarf Brittany was one of the better 
dwarf sugar peas as grown here in 1885, and is still a 
favorite in northwestern Europe. 

It is quite similar to Prince Bismarck in season, productivity 
and size of pods, but with more rigid stems and twining tendrils 
which interlace and hold plants erect. The pods are only moder- 
ately fleshy, but abundant and of good quality. 

Ledman's Dwarf was a favorite English variety, 
unknown here except as a synonym of Dwarf Sugar. 

It was somewhat taller than the preceding varieties, sometimes 
3 feet, and said by McMahon (1806) to be perhaps the most pro- 
lific and profitable of the whole family, and very delicious. 

Dwarf Early Sugar according to Thorburn's 
catalog: 

White-seeded, very early and of fine quality; but Paxton's 
description of 1834 makes it a variety of medium height or below, 
remarkably slender, long-jointed, with scanty, small, pale, yellowish 
green leaflets on long petioles, having small tendrils, small flowers, 
and rather small pods on long stalks. The pods were " roundish," 
well filled with very small peas. It was a second early and " an 
excellent bearer." 

Dwarf Debarbieux was apparently much like Dwarf 
Brittany ; but was not well described in the American 
reference. 

In France it was 3 feet tall, with stocky branches and rather 
heavy stems supporting each other by intertwining tendrils, and 
bearing the top of the plant long, slightly curved, somewhat dis- 
torted, broad, winged pods with large white seeds. It was rather 
late, but productive. 

Medium and Tall White Sugars. Refs. 36-39, 

41-74. Among the very numerous edible-pod peas that 



80 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



range in height from 3 feet to 6 feet or more several are 
also found by name or synonym in preceding groups; 
and no separation appears to be possible between medium 
and tall varieties, the names, synonyms and recorded 
heights being inextricably mixed. The following ones 
in ly Ik- considered fairly representative of the sub-group: 
Dwarf White Edible Podded and Dwarf White 
"■Mi^.ir of Sibley; Extra Earl} Edible Podded; Port) 
l>.i%- *>i\ Weeks White Sugar; Sugar, White 

Sugar, aiul Large \X 1 1 i i « • Edible-pod; Tamarind; 
Sabel, Scimitar and Gianl Sword; Heinrich Ear- 
liest; I arge ♦ rooked Sugar; Saint Desirat, Melting 

■xu^ar and M.im Mi Melting Sugar; Tall Sugar, 

I. ill < rooked Sugar, Late Tall Sugar, and Tall 
White Sugar; Gianl White Tall Edible Podded and 
Tall Mm rh.im Gianl \\ bite. 

Dwarf NN hite Sugar, grown at the Station in 1883. 
and Dwarf \\ 1 1 i I « - Edible Podded, grown the next year, 
seem to have been much alike: 

Heights 4 to 6 and 5 feet, respectively, with long internodes, 
bed Ixith at base and above, foliage medium in amount, size 
and color, slightly glaucous and usually somewhat whitened; with 
paired, pale pods 1 ' _• to 3 inches long, straight, moderately broad, 
blunt ended. They wire very prolific, ripening in midseason and 
maturing gradually. 

Extra Earl) Edible Podded, seed from France, was 
grown here recently. 

Rather dwarfer than the above, occasionally less than 3 feet 
but usually 4. with shorter, narrower, plumper, more curved pods 
with blunt ends. It was earlier and not quite as productive. 

Fort} Days or Six Weeks Edible Pod, another 
French pea, appears to vary decidedly. 

As grown in 1885 and again recently, in both cases from French 
seed, it was about 2 feet tall; but French descriptions and the crop 
as recently gn .wn from German seed make it much taller, 3 ' | to 4 ' , 
feet. The foliage descriptions agree well, and the pods showed only 
slight variations. They were from 2 to 2'i inches long, occasion- 
ally almost 3 inches, moderately wide and plump, straight or 
slightly curved, constricted, with rounded ends. It was very early 
and very productive. 

Sugar and White Sugar were names found in 
early references for tall 6 feeti, large podded (4 to 6 
inches varieties; which are apparently similar to Large 
White Edible Podded, grown at this Station in 1884. 
This last was also called Large White-Podded Sugar. 

Height 3 to 5 feet, with a very " large " stem, with long 
internodes, branched at base and above, with light green, coarse 
foliage more or less whitened, and single, lighter colored pods, 3 
to S inches long and an inch wide, bent and contorted, usually 
adhering closely to the peas tho sometimes inflated, round-ended, 
tender and crisp, but not as sweet as some varieties. It was a 
midseason variety, ripening promptly but not very prolific. 

I .iiii.irind was described by Burr in 1863; but 
it is not certain that it was ever grown in the United 
States. It was called " new " in 1834, and seems to 
have been described by many writers up to 1860, but 
not thereafter. 

I .it< Dwarf s iiiMr was a synonym. 

:rt generally given as 3 to 4 feet, and said to be dwarf 
only in comparison with other sugar peas. It was of luxuriant 
habit, with large, dark green foliage, and very long 4 5 inches', 
broad, curved, fairly plump, well filled pods on long stalks. It was 
late but prolific. 



The Sword Sugar peas, under such names as 
Sabel, Schwert, Scimitar, and Broadsword, appear 
to be rather modern varieties, originating within fifty 
years, and to be still grown in old or improved forms. 
Sabel was grown here from seed raised at McMillan, 
Mich. 

Height 4 to 4' 2 feet; stems stout, branches few, medial; 
foliage coarse but scanty, medium green; tendrils conspicuous, very 
slender, flowers from I lit Kith or 17th node; pods single, on short, 
thick stalks, 3 to 3'_> inches long, broad with wing nearly half the 
breadth, straight except l\ n lateral curving and slight distortion, 
constricted, round to blunt at the ends, and only moderately 
fleshy, of a glistening, whitish green color and held freshness well. 
Season late, yield poor. 

Improved Gianl Sword was also grown here. 

Similar in size to last, but with even stouter stems, more and 
finer foliage With leaflets in 6s rather than 4s, flowering one-fourth 
lower, and having longer pods, 3'| to 4 :| ., inches, with rather less 
wing; late and poor yielder. 

Large Crooked Sugar, or Broadsword, is, by 

that synonym, and Scimitar of Vilmorin, grouped 
with the Sword Sugars, but seems to be an older type. 
Ramshorn is also a synonym. It may date back to 
1778, as the Large Sugar of Mawe-Abercrombie is said 
to have had very large, " bowed " pods. As Come de 
Belier, it has long been known in France, and is still a 
leading variety in Eastern France and Switzerland. 

Height, 4 to 6 feet, with a medium thick stem, long jointed, 
usually branched, pale yellowish green, rather coarse foliage, very 
large white flowers beginning at 12th or 13th node; and single, very 
long pods, 4-5 inches, an inch or more broad, much twisted some- 
what like a ram's horn with 5 to 8 large peas, prominent in the pods 
even at early stages. It is fairly early, very productive, and of 
fine quality, ranking as one of the best in the class. 

Heinrich Earliest is said to be from the Nether- 
lands. 

A week or more earlier than the Sword peas, not as tall, with 
slenderer stems without branches and with shorter, more curved, 
fleshier pods. It is a very fine quality sugar pea and fairly 
productive. 

Tall Half-sugar is described in a French pea book 
as of American origin, but it has not been found, at 
least under this name, in American catalogs or literature. 

Height 4'.| to 4j^ feet; seldom branched: foliage light green, 
medium in amount; flowers from the 6th node; pods on long stalks, 
single, numerous, of medium size, slightly curved, with little or no 
wing, plump and square ended. Early and productive. 

The Melting Sugar peas, with two uncertain 
exceptions, Saint-Desiral Melting, and Carter's \<-\> 
Melting Marrow Edible-podded, appear to be of 
American origin, or at least to be listed only by American 
seedsmen. 

All are characterized by tender, crisp, thick flesh in the pods 
which develops long before the peas are much grown and makes 
the table quality excellent. The pods are not especially long, rarely 
reaching 5 inches, but are broad. They are usually quite straight, 
but may be slightly distorted. Picking may begin in early mid- 
season and continue for two weeks or more until good to very good 
crops are secured. 

Perfection Sugar, announced by Henderson in 
1919, appears to belong in the Melting Sugar type, tho 
rather taller and with somewhat longer pods of even 
better quality. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



81 



Yellow-podded Sugar was an old variety, listed 
by Burr, apparently of the Melting Sugar type, but with 
very yellow pods, and seeds more oblong than those of 
most other varieties of the group. Color of pods alone 
recommended it, as it was not hardy or productive. 
It was said to be similar to White-podded Sugar, except 
for the color of the pods; but was white -flowered and 
white-seeded whereas White-podded Sugar was a 
Pisuni sativum var. arvense descendant, with purple 
flowers and dark seeds. 

The descriptions of Tall Sugar, Tall Late Sugar, 
and Giant While of Thorburn may be inferred from 
the names. They are very old varieties. 

Inferior in thickness of flesh, earliness and productivity to 
Melting Sugar, and especially to the Butter Sugar peas, to be 
described later. They had yellowish-green foliage like Large 
Crooked Sugar, small flowers and single, large, broad, usually rather 
straight pods 

Tall Edible Podded was grown at this Station in 
1884. 

Pods short, blunt ended and of good quality; extremely pro- 
lific, late, but ripening its crops very promptly. 

Tall Moerheim Giant White, an old German pea, 
is better than its name would indicate. 

Not specially tall, rarely reaching 4}4 feet, and sometimes 
much shorter. It is really a Melting Sugar type pea, with 4 to 4}^ 
inch pods, very broad, plump, straight, blunt ended, only slightly 
constricted, but very light in color. It is late, but very productive; 
and the pods are of fine quality. 

WHITE-FLOWERED, WRINKLED-SEEDED SECTION 
White Wrinkled Sugar Peas. Refs. 75-80. 
Wrinkling means little in Sugar peas, as the pods, to 
be of good table quality, must be used before any great 
difference in composition between smooth and wrinkled 
seeds can show itself. However, several varieties of 
white, wrinkled-seeded peas have fleshy pods, of which 
the following are best known: 

Wrinkled Sugar, or Knight Dwarf Marrow 
Sugar, is perhaps oldest of the type, tracing to Thos. 
Andrew Knight who worked on peas early in the nine- 
teenth century. It is still listed in France, but only 
as a minor variety, and was probably never grown in 
America. 

It is a semi-dwarf, 2j^ to 3 feet tall, with numerous, small, 
paired pods, generally straight, long-rounded at the end, with 
large tip, narrow, rather plump, not constricted. The seeds are 
white, wrinkled, square, or flattened and small. The lateness, 
small pods and comparatively poor yield make it not worth growing. 

Another pea similarly named was grown at the 
Station in 1884 under the synonym Wrinkled Edible 
Podded. 

Tall (5 feet); stems strong, much branched; foliage abundant, 
medium green, whitened not glaucous; pods pale, 2 to 4 inches long, 
rather blunt at the end, peas large, croweded. It was late, ripened 
slowly, and was very prolific. 

Late Wyker Sugar and Vilmorin Edible-podded 

were very tall, late, wrinkled varieties with rather small 
pods, curved in the first, straight in the other. Vil- 
morin's pea had, also, a rather dwarf strain. All were 
late, heavy bearers with pods of good quality. 



BUTTER SUGAR SECTION 

Butter Sugars. Refs. 82-88. The edible-podded 
peas of this group are quite distinct from most of the 
others, the pods being thick-walled, but nearly round in 
section, or at least very plump, without notable con- 
striction, and of most excellent quality, being fleshy, 
crisp, juicy and fine flavord. 

Edible Podded Butler, grown at this Station in 
1884, altho Beurre is given as a synonym for it, seems 
more like White Thick-podded Butter of Benary, which 
was grown here recently, than like Vilmorin's Beurre. 

Both were 2} 2 feet tall, unbranched, with rather short inter- 
nodes, medium green foliage, and rather small pods, strongly curved, 
slightly or not at all constricted and with about 5 peas. Both 
were fairly early and not very productive. 

Tall Butter Sugar of Gregory, Vilmorin's Beurre, 
the Thick-podded Butter grown here from seeds raised 
at McMillan, Michigan, and the Giant Butter of Eng- 
land seem very much alike, also being 4 feet or more in 
height, with larger, more curved or sickle shaped pods, 
later, and more productive. 

Pride of the Garden Golden Butter is like the 
dwarfer forms first described, with golden yellow pods. 
It was said to be early, very productive, and better 
in flavor than other sugar peas. 

COLORED-FLOWERED, DARK-SEEDED SECTION 
Varieties in this section are undoubtedly derived 
from Pisum sativum var. arvense, the field pea, and 
have bi-colored flowers with red or purple wings, purplish 
marking about leaf-axils, and dark colored seeds ranging 
from light gray, deeply pin-pointed with brown or purple, 
to deep self maroon. The seeds usually show much more 
wrinkling than do those of the white-flowered sugar peas, 
Nearly all of the varieties are more than four feet tall, 
and exceedingly similar. None of the varieties is as 
dwarf as a few in the cream-seeded section. 

Dwarf and Semi-Dwarf Gray Sugars. Refs. 
89-96. Dwarf Gray Sugar was described by Ferry 
in 1882, and by Denaiffe, Bolgiano and Brown. 

Height less than l\i feet, but in 1892 Ferry makes it 2 feet 
tall; and Allan, Dreer, Lindholm, Rice, and others, and tests at 
this Station in 1884 and recently, make it 2 to 2 J^ feet tall. Pods 
rather small, seldom over 3 inches, curved, sometimes distorted, 
blunt ended, small seeded, and fairly plump and fleshy. It is 
moderately early and quite prolific. 

Dwarf Giant Podded, Prolific Giant Podded 
and Dwarf Gray Edible Podded were rather taller 
peas. 

Stems stouter, branching, occasionally reaching 3 feet in 
height; pods 3 to 3)2 inches or slightly longer, broad, much twisted, 
with more and larger peas. The size of the peas, with the rather 
thin flesh, made it necessary to harvest the pods early to avoid 
the disagreeable taste from the colored peas. 

French Dwarf Sugar, listed by Thorburn in 1892, 
may, or may not, have had colored seeds as do the 
taller French Sugars which follow. 

Tall Gray Sugars. Refs. 81, 97-125. The Tall 
Gray Sugar peas fall into several groups based on some 
rather characteristic part of the name; but such group- 
ings are purely arbitrary and if at some time based on 



s: 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



varietal differences, these have disappeared with time 
or by the duplication or repetition of synonyms. 

I rencb Sugar, described by Sutton, was grown 
here recently from his seed and others from British 
Columbia. 

Very tall. BuWUI very high on the stem and bears single 4 to 

:nrh pods, very broad, almost straight, not greatly constricted 

■tarted with quite wide wing, and with 5 to 8 rather large, 

considerably pined and wrinkled seeds, from light brown with very 

fine, obscure, purplish pin point dots to self colored dark maroon. 

It is late and not productive and the flesh is rather thin. 

Red Flowered Sugar, of Chocolate, was described 
by Burr, but probably not grown in the United States. 
It was tall, late, and evidently much like French Sugar. 

l.i.uit Sugar, with its various synonyms (Refs. 
101 104a' is characterized by huge pods from 4'_> to 
more than 6 inches long, broad, flat, poorly filled, 
much constricted, and distorted. The purple coloration 
at the nodes of the stem is very marked. Height in 
Europe varies from 5 to 7 feet, in America from 4' ■> to 
6 feet. There are apparently two types in this group, 
not usually distinguishable by name, the taller form 
being very late, with smaller, paired pods; the other 
shorter-stemmed, less vigorous, earlier and with single, 
larger pods. 

< . i.iti t Florentine is said to be similar to Giant 
Sugar, but with pods generally straighter. This was 
confirmed by Station tests of the two, the pods being 
checked as " slightly curved " for the former, with little 
distortion, and " much curved " for the latter. 

(iiani Switzerland, in our tests, was indistin- 
guishable from Giant Florentine except, possibly, for 
pods rounded to blunt ended for the latter, blunt ended 
to square for the former. 

FIELD 
Nearly all of the so-called " field " or " feeding " 
or " hog " peas have at some time and some place been 
used for human food ; and many of them are extensively 
used as boiling peas, or, either whole or split, for soup 
making. The varieties with colored flowers and dark 
seeds, the true field peas, Pisum sativum var. arvense, 
are used in some European countries for consumption in 
the home; but the wild, slightly acrid taste of peas of 
this type does not appeal to English, French, or American 
palates; so they are rarely grown in these countries 
except for feeding animals, as soiling, pasturage, hay or 
grain crops. 

The minor importance of field peas for human food, 
with our necessarily limited space, prevents detailed 
descriptions of these varieties; but roughly classified 
lists of them are given, those marked with * having 
been grown in our tests and described on our note sheets. 
The varieties in each sub-group are arranged somewhat 
in the order of their time of fitness for use as garden 
peas, as recorded in our notes; and occasional annotations 
call attention to particular merits or demerits of the 
variety. 

The general arrangement follows the plan indicated 
below : 



The Luscious sub-group includes varieties with 
pods very similar to those of the Melting Sugar sub- 
group of cream-seeded peas; but the plants are taller, 
usually 4 ' •_> to 6 feet. Luscious has pods shorter by 
about a half inch than varieties with Mammoth Lus- 
cious as part of the name, in which the pods run from 
3'j to 4'_» inches, not quite as large as those of Giant 
Sugar. A decided admixture of gray seeds with those 
much darker seems to characterize the Luscious varieties, 
and separates them from the next sub-group. 

The Mammoth-pod Sugars are very similar to 
the preceding ones; but the seeds are quite uniformly 
dark brown or maroon, similar to but even darker than 
French Sugar, tho smaller. 

Grej Sugar, Tall Graj Sugar, Sugar and Salad 
Sugar are similar in the predominance of " gray " 
seeds, that is, seeds with rather light fundamental color, 
densely marked with very fine pin points of darker 
shade, the self-colored brownish seeds being relatively 
less in number. Sugar has somewhat larger pods, 
almost as large as those in the Giant; but the others, 
except for the seeds, are like those of the preceding three 
groups. 

Fishamend's Sugar was described long ago in an 
American periodical; but may never have grown in this 
country. It is notable for its tallness, reaching 7 1 ■> feet. 
The seeds were small, apparently much like those of the 
Gray Sugars. The pods were large, " much curved," 
and said to be best of all except Large Crooked Sugar. 

\\ liil<-|xxl(l<<l Siifiar bore pods like those of the 
Giant Sugar type, but very light colored. It was 4 to 5 
feet tall as grown in America, late, not specially pro- 
ductive nor were the pods of as good quality as those of 
many other varieties. 

PEAS 

Character of seed: Cream (white) -seeded, cream-seeded with 
black eyes, green-seeded, or dark-seeded. 
(I) Short-vincd, under 3 feet. 

(a) Short-podded, under 2?2 inches. 

(b) Pods of medium length, 2)'2 to 3 inches. 

(c) Long-podded, over 3 inches. 
'Ill Vines of medium length, 3 to 4 feet. 
Ill Long vines, over 4 feet. 

IV Minor characters unknown. 

CREAM i WHITE SEEDED SECTION 
I, a- •<;..!. l.-n Vine (much taller in Station test. 1884 . 
" K • > I > ■ I > .i . b 'Agnes wood North, poor South*, "Nelson (goodi. 
II. a "Smiley, "White Canada Iboth very goodi, French, 
Small French; (b) "Brown thyss Inian (early); (c) "Archer 
i pointed pods). III. a > *W i-IIwimmI, "Amraoti, "Canada Field, 
"Canada Yeuow Field, "Farnham, "French June June," 

Kov.ilcil" very good . "Gregory; l> 'Andes, "White Colorado 
Colorado . "Chunart, "Multiplier, "Arthur, "Golden Mar- 
row, "Valencias, "Victoria; [e "Canadian Beauty, "Colorado 
Field, " 1884 Golden Drop. IV. Pearl, Suffolk i both excellent 
split-pea varieites), Supenau, wliii<- Hundredfold. 

CREAM SEEDED, BLACK EYED SECTION 
'II, b "Paragon. III. a "Chang; !> "Canada, "Prince; 
c "Black-eyed Marrowfat. IV) Blaek-eyea Nos. I & 2. 

GREEN SEEDED SECTION 
I. a ' 1884 Dwarf Blue Imperial and Dwarf Blue 
I'm — Ian, Brunswick Green; i> Dominion [poor "Blue Urll. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



83 



•Openshaw (lJ^-2 ft.). 'Blue Canadian, "World I'ri/.e. (II. a) 
'Itangulia I purple-flowered, seeds tinged brownish), 'Scotch 
Beauty, *S©otch Blue; (b) 'Green, *BalI. (Ill, a) 'Scotch 
late'; ib) 'Blue Imperial, *Blm» Prussian, *Vida, Russian 
Blue ivery good). IV. Albany (Dwarf Green Albany), Common 
Blue, Early Blue (from Canada, good), Green Canada, Green 
Scotchman; ic) 'Puslike. 



DARK SEEDED SECTION 
(I, b) 'Mummy (= Early Crown). (II, a) 'Early Heavy 
Cropper (good), 'Cavalier, 'Meyer, 'Cossack, 'Delano, 'Kaiser, 

MINOR VARIETIES OF EXTRA EARLY GROUP 



'Carleton (= Peluschka, = Partridge) (very good); (b) 'Negro 
(purple-podded, = Nero), 'Killarney, 'Solo (lacks purple markings 
on stem), Black English; (c) 'Peluschka. (Ill, a) 'Hubert, 
'Frailc (very good forage pea), 'French Gray, 'Husbands, 
'Austrian Winter; (b) 'Maple Partridge Brittany, 'Early 
Britain; (c) 'Maple, 'Partridge, English Brown or Speckled 
(very tall). (IV) Common Gray, Gray Hastings, Gray Rounci- 
val, Gray Warwick (= Early Nimble Hog Pea), Gray Winter 
(= Winter), Late Gray (=TalI Gray, Tall Capucine, Large Gray), 
McAdoo (= Kaiser), Scotch Gray. 

Character unknown: Strawl»crry Vine, Field Creeper. 



Superfine Early, given by Burr (1863) as a synonym of 
Charlton, was mentioned as a separate variety by Booth (1810). 

Miehaux de Rouelle, generally considered identical with 
Hotspur, was grown at this Station in 1883 (Rpt. 3:253. 1885) 
and seemed the same as that variety as incompletely described 
years before: 

Rather tall; stem heavy, branched at base; pods of medium 
length, broad, plump; crop rather late, slow maturing, good. 

Eastern Shore, generally held same as Charlton, was said 
by Loudon (Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836) to be later; tall, slender- 
vined; producing freely small, short, round pods with 4 to 5 peas. 

Booth Early (Booth Car. 1810) is the earliest American 
variety of the pea found recorded ; undoubtedly a strain of Hotspur 
or Early Frame. 

Early Dwarf (Syns. Earliest Dwarf, Russell Early and 
Early June) was grown by C. M. Hovey (Mag. Hort. 10:91. 1844). 
He thought it originated from Hotspur or Charlton. 

Found very hardy, a strong grower and fair producer of long, 
narrow, poorly filled pods with 6 or 7 peas. 

Tall Frame was described, from an English source, in an 
American periodical in 1836 (Am. Gard. Mag. 2:438) and may 
never have reached America. A taller, slenderer strain of Charlton. 

Racehorse. Refs. 15, 16, 30. Rogers described Racehorse 
in 1 839 as of recent origin but already popular ; as very prolific and 
particularly adapted for a first crop, " coming into bearing ten or 
more days before any other sort." Mentioned in America in 1844, 
and as grown in 1845 pronounced " not of merit." Generally con- 
sidered same as Early Warwick, but once given as a synonym of 
Cedo Nulli. 

Early Burlington (Refs. 27, 131a) seems to have come 
from seed of Landreth Extra Early, furnished by Landreth to Thos. 
Hancock, Burlington, N. J. It may have been improved by selec- 
tion to justify the new name. Ferry connects this with Phila- 
delphia Extra Early, thus strengthening the presumption that the 
latter is a strain of Landreth's older pea. 

Miehaux ordinaire and Miehaux de Hollande, referred to 
under Early Emperor, were grown at this Station in 1926, from 
Seed raised by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, at McMillan, 
Mich. They are typical extra earlies, with more abundant foliage, 
larger flowers borne lower on the stems, and decidedly larger peas 
and seeds; pods better filled, plump and from 2 5 g to 2 7 8 inches long 
in each variety, but characteristically small-tipped in Miehaux 
ordinaire. This was a week earlier than the other. 

Danecroft Rival (Refs. 42—45) was raised about 1837 by 
Girling but was also known as Warner's, from the seedsman who 
handled it. It was Early Emperor in everything except color of 
foliage and pods, a peculiar glossy, sickly green due to lack of bloom. 
Only a curiosity, but received several other names, or several other 
varieties very similar to, if not identical with it, were developed. 
The latest of these, Sutton's Emerald Gem, was said to be from 
entirely different stock; and is given a separate description. 

Cedo Nulli (Refs. 31 (Racehorse), 38, 46-49), later synony- 
mous with Early Washington, appears to have had a separate 
origin and independent history. Credit for it is given (Mag. Hort. 
4:87. 1838; and 5:87. 1839) to Sinclair and introduction dated 
1838. 

An improved Early Frame; 3 feet high, of strong growth; pods 
of good size, long, nearly round, peas 6-8, of excellent quality; 
very early and prolific. To this Rural New Yorker (12:271. 1861) 



adds: Season 69 days to edible maturity from April 26, grows finely, 
yields well; peas sweet, very fine; " an excellent pea." 

Superior First Early (Ref. 50), an English strain, credited 
to Farnes, probably came to this country as one of the " First 
Earlies " cataloged by American seedsmen; but no direct connection 
has been traced. It is mentioned here to show uncertainty of 
interpretation of printed data; as it was said (Gard. Chron. 630. 
1843; and 535. 1844) to be "ready 1014 days ahead of Early 
May " and the next year " much later than Early May." 

Early Nimble Dick. Ref. 59. Undoubtedly a synonym of 
Early Frame; but listed only in America; 2j^ feet high. 

Hill Extra Early. Refs. 60, 61; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 529. 
1863. This variety was introduced some time before 1844 by Hill; 
but seems not to have spread very widely, tho continued for many 
years. Now entirely superseded. By Burr it is placed under 
Charlton, as a pea as hardy and nearly or quite as early and 
prolific as Daniel O'Rourke and several of the most approved, 
earliest foreign varieties, and much more stocky and vigorous. 

Three feet high, of strong growth; with long, very large, round, 
full pods, ready in two pickings and containing 7-8 peas of excellent 
quality. 

True May (Refs. 28, 65) may be distinct from Early May, 
and shorter-vined. 

Bedalean. Refs. 66, 67; Gard. Chron. 97. 1848. This 
strain of Early Frame was introduced by Jackson in 1847, as " 6-12 
days before any other;" 3^ feet high, with handsome well-filled 
pods, and prolific; but in tests made by the Horticultural Society of 
London was found of no particular merit. Probably never in 
America, tho the name occurs as a synonym of other varieties 
grown here. 

Fair head Early Champion (Ref. 71) was not listed for 
some years after Sutton Early Champion, but may be identical 
with it; since it is said to be similar to Warner Early Emperor 
in pods; and Warner Conqueror, identical with Sutton Early 
Champion, is also a synonym of Early Emperor. It was very early. 

Fairhead Early Conqueror (Ref. 72) was advertised as 
new by Sutton in 1854; but there is such confusion in the pea notes 
of the time between Fairhead and Fairbeard, Conqueror and 
Champion, that it may or may not be distinct. 

Railway. Refs. 73-76. As this pea was introduced in 
1859, some years before Dillistone Early, Carter's First Crop and 
Sutton's Ringleader, each pronounced identical with the others 
and with Railway, the credit for originating peas of this sub-type 
should be given to Isherwood, introducer of Railway. Mcintosh 
says Railway is only a variety of Early Frame, of no special merit. 
Unknown in America under this name. 

Hovey Extra Early (Refs. 86; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 529. 
1863) was raised before 1852 by Pope, and sold to Hovey. It was 
called " the earliest variety yet introduced," and, later, " an 
American improved early sort of Charlton." It was said to be 
hardy, and prolific. Not in Bailey's list of varieties for sale in 
1889. 

Taylor Prolific (Refs. 88, 89; Jour. Hort. 48:378. 1872) 
was introduced in 1852 by Bass and Brown and is included here 
only because listed by Burr, who says it is similar to Daniel 
O'Rourke in habit, production, and early maturity. A later 
English description makes it similar in shape and size of pods to 
Sangster No. 1, strictly single-podded, and very superior to old 
Early Kent, " from which it has, no doubt, originated." 



84 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Sebaatopol. Refs. 91 second'. 100 102; Burr Fid. Gard. 
Vr,} 547 -fig Gard. Vr. BA. 14:72. 1S73. Advertised 

in 1855 by Davvr. Cottrcll and Bcnhnm. London, as Cornell's 
Sebastopol. Hogg makes Early Scbastopol a synonym of Early 
Emperor. Listed in America in 1859 as Sebastopol, described DJ 
Butt, but said by Professor Goff to be synonymous with Daniel 
O'Rourkc. 

Slender -vined, single Bowered, pods 2 j inches long, peas 5 to 
rhich, like the seeds, were " s. ttinguishable in size, 

f,,riv. from tlir Early Frame or kindred varieties." Not 

specially early, but very productive, and of superior quality. 

It. . k Morning Star. K< t Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 2:67. 
1855. Th: id of Beck Morning St.ir, except as a synonym, 

says it was 3 feet high and podded early and freely. 

I ... -I .mi. ,1 Sir M.m.i. Kris. 103; Cultivator 47. 1888. 
An extra early pea from Austrian Australian?! stock. 

Dunnetl Rrsl Early. Refs. 104; Country Gent. .'{."> : 6 14 . 
1870. In 1858 said to be " in every way superior to Daniel 
O'Rourke." earlier, with finer pods and peas of richer flavor; -' ' _> 
feet high. In 1870 noted as grown in America. 

DUliatone Early. Refs. 51, 56, 105 109a; Burr Fid. Gard. 
Veg. 532. 1863; Jour. Hort. ,'l.l:467. 1865; Gard. Chron. 221. 
1866, and 701. 1867; Am. Hort. Ann. 135. 1867. Railway and 
Dilhstonc Early preceded First Crop and Ringleader which proved 
identical with them; but they have never received as much notice. 
Dillistonc First Early, advertised in 1859, was said, later, to be from 
a single plant in a row of Bryant, or Bradman, Wonder, a variety 
otherwise unknown. Tho considered by most writers as identical 
with previously introduced varieties, others thought it much earlier 
and with a special tendency to open all blossoms at once and to 
produce its pods for a single picking. It was described by Burr in 
1863 and mentioned in several American catalogs and periodicals of 
the period, but apparently never widely grown. 

Petersburg Ref. 110 was recorded in 1860 as an early pea 
not as good in flavor as Early Warwick. 

Earl] Princess, Refs. 111-115; Rural N. Y. 12:271. 1861. 
Early Princess is apparently an American variety, entirely dis- 
tinct from Princessc given by Thompson as a synonym of Tall 
White Marrow. 

Referred to as new in 1861 and said to have a shorter season 
than Daniel O'Rourkc. taller vines and somewhat sweeter peas; 
but later references call vine " low, short, dwarfish," 2 ' •_> feet high, 
praise quality of peas and give color when cooked as lively green. 
When sown very late, pods were ready in 40 days, but when sown 
five weeks earlier it required 65 days to picking. The 5-6 small, 
round peas, with the points given above, clearly place the variety 
in the Extra Early Group. 

Carpenter Expre — . Refs. 117, 118. Seeds of most of 
several " Express " peas are blue or green; but this white-seeded 
one was introduced in 1863 by Carpenter as " the earliest pea known 
with large pods." It was soon held to be identical with Sangster 
No. I, Daniel O'Rourke and others of the group, tho attention was 
called to its very white flowers. It is uncertain whether this white- 
seeded form was known in America. 

Wheeler Extra Kurl>. Ref. 129. Tested at the experi- 
mental farm in Washington, D. C, in 1865, and found very similar 
to First Crop; not " a week earlier than Daniel O'Rourke or Sangster 
No. 1," as claimed for it. 

Double I.vir.i Early. Ref. 130. Deacon's Double Extra 
Early was listed in 1865 by the Superintendent of the Department 
of Agriculture Experimental Farm, Washington. D. C. 

label Earl] Perfection. Refs. 136 138; Evans Car. 1868. 
This pea was advertised in 1866, by Veitch 1 1, as originated by 
Geo. Taber; but is evidently older. Listed in America in 1868 as 
among the earliest varieties, but name was given by Goff as a 
synonym of Caractacus. 

Said to have been very early, of robust habit, a day or two 
later than Sangster No. 1; and more viny than that variety or 
Daniel O'Rourkc; recommended as the " heaviest cropping first 
early." 

Poynter 1 irli. -t and Best. Refs. 139-41; Gard. Chron. 
630. 680. 1868 Ann Hort 123. 1889; SaUer Cat. 1900. An 
Earliest and Best pea was noted in 1865 as grown for several years. 



and was advertised under his name in 1866 by Poynter. Poynter 
Earliest and Best was briefly mentioned as being as early as Ring- 
leader, more productive and vigorous; but was found at Chiswick 
to be the same as Daniel O'Rourke. It is unknown whether or not 
this is the Earliest and Best advertised in 1900 and noted as having 
been sold on the La Crosse, Wis., market for 25 years; but we 
have no record of any other pea thus named dating back so far. 
Bailey reports an Earliest and Best on sale in 1889. The Wis- 
consin strain was described as " the earliest white pea on earth," 
1 ' _■ to .' ' . feet high, extremely prolific, with 8 to 12 straight pods, 
each containing 7 K medium sized, smooth, round peas, yellowish 
white when ripe. 

Electric Ref. 142 | was listed as new in 1869, by Fcrre, 
Batchelder & Co., and said to be 2 feet tall and very early. Its 
height separates it from the Electric tested by this Station in 1890. 
Dreer's Electric Extra Early is green seeded. 

Buisl Extra Earl) Ref. 1491 was introduced about 1871 
and said to be " better than Charactacus as a green market 
pea." 

Extra Earl] Winship Ref. 150) was listed as new in 1872, 
Gregory considering it a remarkably early American pea, an im- 
provement on Daniel O'Rourke. 

Hancock. Refs. 155, 156; Country Gent. 11:266. 1859; 
Gregory Cat. 1885; Mich. Sta. Bui. 1H:233; 1897; Buist Cat. 
1913. Hancock was listed in 1878 as a new American pea, but 
without indication of its source. In a letter in Country Gentle- 
man Landreth says Early Burlington originated from seed of 
Landreth Extra Early in the hands of Thos. Hancock, Burlington, 
N. J.; and it seems not at all unlikely that Mr. Hancock continued 
his selection in Early Burlington and introduced a new strain under 
his own name. This is merely conjecture, supported by Buist 's 
statement that Philadelphia Extra Early originated in that city 
and was originally called Hancock, so that the latter may well 
have been developed in the near-by Jersey section and found such 
favor as to be renamed for the city itself. If so, Hancock precedes 
Philadelphia chronologically. 

Descriptions of the pea are exceedingly meager. The hor- 
ticulturists at the Michigan Station say it was so nearly like Rural 
New Yorker that no marked differences could be detected; but they 
do not make either name a synonym of the other. 

Boston Extra Early. Ref. 160. Listed by Vaughan in 1883. 

( iiirtcr New (Ref. 161 1 was sent to America in 1883 for testing 
in advance of its introduction in 1884, by Carter. 

The figure given shows a very small, straight, square-ended 
pod, borne singly, and exceedingly large stipules, considerably 
longer than the pod. The notes describe Carter New as ready for 
use at the same time as Ferry First and Best and Henderson First 
of All (67 days from April 6), with more pods then ready, but not 
maturing promptly, and with the yield of peas much smaller, - very 
little more than half of Henderson's First of All. The seeds were 
very small, smooth, and buff in color. 

Witch Selected Extra Early Ref. 163), probably not grown 
in America, was said by writers to be " a week ahead of Dickson 
First and Best; prolific " and " best early pea I ever saw and most 
prolific bearer." 

Ferrj Extra Early. Refs. 164; S. Dak. Sta. Buls. H.'»:4. 
1904, and 91:5. 1905. Introduced by Ferry, carried in the cata- 
logs of the firm until 1898 or later and then dropped, probably 
as inferior to First and Best since it was not as even in vine and pods, 
did not ripen its pods as promptly tho some were as early, and 
the peas were rather larger In Prof. Goff's description, no points 
arc given that would enable us definitely to separate the strain 
from others. Cooking tests revealed little in favor of the peas. 

Reedland. Refs. 167; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. .1:245. 1885. 
Received in 1884 from Landreth for testing at this Station and 
found second early in season and not productive. It appeared to 
be a sub-variety of Philadelphia. 

Vick Kxtrn Early 'Ref. 169) as received from Vick. and 
tested at this Station in 1885, proved to be really early, with pods 
ready to pick in 55 days from April 24; but gave few pods to the 
vine and few peas to the pod. It was considered a synonym of, 
or selection from. Early Kent. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



85 



Gem of the Season iRef. 178), credited to Daniels, was 
introduced about 1885, but probably never regularly in commerce 
in America. It was grown at the Station in 1926, from seed fur- 
nished by the U. S Department of Agriculture from its 1925 crop 
at McMillan, Mich. 

Pods 2 ' 2-3 inches long, plump, blunt ended; peas 4-5. medium 
sized whitish green, edible in 68 days; seeds regular Extra Early 
type; crop only fair, ratio of peas to pods not high, quality of the 
peas not more than fair. 

Smith Extra Early. Refs. 179; notes of Prof Goff. 1885. 
It is doubtful whether this pea properly belongs in the group; but 
the name places it here, tho its curved pods would place it in 
Scimitar group or Senator group, according to unknown character 
of seed. 

It was found as a " sport (?) of Alpha" by H. N Smith, 
South Sudbury Mass.. and after careful selection for several years 
was introduced in 1885. In the Rural Experiment Garden the 
plants were a foot taller than those of Rural New Yorker, but 
Prof. Goff found it only 2 ) o feet high. It was decidedly later than 
the better Extra Earlies, a better bearer, the pods generally paired, 
of better color, longer but more slender, and more scimitar shaped. 
Apparently it never attracted much attention. 

Snowflake. Refs 189; Buckbee Car. 1918. Snowflake was 
a selection from Early Kent, made by Alexander in 1886, but not 
introduced until 1892; earlier than the parent variety, more dwarf, 
more prolific, and of better quality. 

This, or some other Snowflake, was called a field pea in 
1918 

Hampden Earliest. Refs. 193; Vt. Sta. Rpt. 160. 1890. 
As tested at this Station in 1888 considered a strain of Philadelphia. 
The seed of this pea came from B. L. Bragg 86 Co., Springfield, 
Mass., which is near Hampden. The Vermont Station called 
it early, but the figures for pods per vine and peas per pod make it 
unproductive. 

Lee Earliest (Ref. 194) is known only by the name. 

Premier Extra Early. Refs. 200; Buist Car. 1913; also 
letter from Buist, Nov. 24, 1926.) Premier, an Extra Early intro- 
duced by Buist, was a selection from Daniel O'Rourke and the 
firm's favorite early pea before Morning Star and was selected from 
it. It dates prior to 1889, when both strains were listed by 
Bailey. The introducer specifies earliness and prompt ripening of 
all pods as prominent characteristics of the pea. 

Early .Morning, Early Morning Star, Morning Star. 
Refs. 201-204; Kans. Rpt. 152. 1889; letter from Buist, Nov. 24, 
1926. Since all of these peas, if not identical, came from Buist 
before, or in, 1889, they are here grouped as one variety. They 
have no connection with Beck Morning Star, synonymous with 
Early Emperor ; and they are also quite distinct from the Morning 
Star of Hammond and that of J. L. Childs (if these are not the 
samei, of which the seeds are wrinkled. Buist Morning Star was 
selected from Premier Extra Early. 

Morning Star (seeds from Buist) and Early Morning Star 
(seeds from Maule) were both grown here for three seasons, and 
seemed to differ slightly the first year, when the detailed descrip- 
tions were made; but the differences are probably attributable, in 
the main, to poor germination of the Early Morning Star seeds 
and lack of vigor in the plants, which resulted in less abundant foliage 
and a very poor yield. The crop of Morning Star was better, plant 
for plant, though still only " good." Morning Star was a day or 
two earlier than the so-called early strain, its pods longer and 
averaging one pea more to the pod ; but the pods of the other strain 
were very plump, being thicker than broad, and the individual peas 
were larger. These differences diminished in crops grown the 
second year from the same lots of seed, and disappeared the third 
year when the two strains were grown from crop seeds of the first 
year. Data from the early Station trial of Early Morning are 
incomplete, but do not separate this strain from either of the other 
two. 

Orange County Morning Star (Ref. 205) may be merely 
a synonym of Early Morning Star, but no connection is evident 
between either the Buist Co. or Philadelphia, and Orange County, 
so it is listed separately. It was offered for sale in 1889. 

Extra Early Challenge. Refs. 208, 209: Currie Cars. 1906, 
1926. Extra Early Challenge was apparently introduced by Currie 
previous to, or in 1889; and was said to be very extensively grown 



in 1906. It may be the same as Challenge, later Iowa Challenge, 
listed by the Iowa Seed Co., and described on page 29. At the 
Michigan Station it was among the earliest peas, but was not pro- 
ductive. It was only 1% feet high, which may indicate a poor pea 
season, and account for the poor yield. It is still carried by the 
firm introducing it; and its earliness, short season and productiveness 
are featured. 

Ely, Faust, Johnson & Stokes, Manic, Plant, and Wilson 
Improved Extra Earlies. Ref. 212. Each of these varieties was 
listed for sale in 1889, in the catalog of seedsman whose name is 
attached. 

Forty-two Days (Ref. 2211 was introduced by A. D. Perry 
& Co., Syracuse, N. Y., previous to 1889, when listed by Bailey. 
It was carried by Perry's successor for several years, then abandoned 
for Alaska and the early wrinkled peas. It had a local distribution. 

Eleetric (Ref 224; and unpublished notes), from J. F. 
Tillinghast, La Plume, Pa., was tested at this Station in 1890. 

It was tall (3' 2 feet), early, productive, with light green foliage 
having small stipules, and bore straight, pointed pods containing 
6 small, smooth, whitish peas, not of the best quality. The pointed 
pods might exclude it from this group. 

Budlong (Ref. 225) was introduced by Leonard before 1890. 
Tested at the Michigan Station, it was called a strain of First and 
Best or Extra Early, and was productive, averaging 6-8 pods per 
vine and 5 peas per pod. 

Nebraska Lightning (Ref. 226) was introduced in 1891 by 
the Emerson Seed Co., Omaha, Neb. It probably was Carter's 
Lightning, which came to America shortly before this date. 

Family Garden. Refs. 227; Maule Cat. 1894. Family 
Garden was introduced prior to 1892 by Maule. It was Maule 
Extra Early, with its cropping season extended so that it could be 
used for from one to three weeks from its first edible maturity, at 
about 45 to 50 days, " an excellent, smooth early pea." A letter 
from the introducing firm says it is an " improvement on Improved 
Extra Early " and one Improved Extra Early, at least, is Pedigree 
Extra Early. As sown in Kentucky on April 29 it was ready in 
53 days, a scant bearer of large, well-filled pods. 

Extra Early Market Garden. Ref. 228. Johnson & 
Stokes called this variety, introduced before 1893, a strain of their 
Selected Extra Early, announced after several years of careful selec- 
tion. It was said to be IJ2 feet to 2 feet high, earlier than the 
parent stock, with full, round, dark green pods of strong texture 
for shipping. In 1893 introducers claimed an annual sale of 5,000 
bushels of seed of this variety to market gardeners. 

Despot. Refs. 233; letter of Dec. 18, 1926, from Tait. 
Despot is an old variety, said to have come from Daniel O'Rourke, 
used in the South for many years because of its dwarf habit, vigorous 
growth without vininess even in wet seasons, resistance to drouth, 
and heavy yield of small pods. The peas were only medium in 
quality. 

Canada Extra Early (Ref. 234 1 was listed by Landreth in 
1896 as an early pea of somewhat variable quality. 

Evergreen Pod (Ref. 235) was listed as new by Landreth in 
1896. 

It was said to be l 1 ! feet tall, almost as early as Landreth 
Extra Early, very productive, with pods very dark green in color, 
which they retain long Valuable as a shipper. 

New York Market. Ref. 236; Pino Car. 1923. Though 
listed as a variety, correspondence reveals that, recently at least, 
this name is applied to any one of several strains of Extra Early, 
according to the availability and price of the seeds in the current 
season, and the general reputation for earliness and productivity 
of the variety selected for the honor. 

Earliest Market (Ref. 236a), listed in 1899 by Elliot, was 
a very uniform, robust strain of Extra Early, lYt feet tall, with 
very plump, rounded pods. 

Record Extra Early (Ref. 237) was introduced in 1898 by 
Johnson & Stokes, and said to be the result of nine years' careful 
selection from that firm's Extra Early Market Garden. 

Dandy Extra Early. Ref. 238. Michell introduced this 
variety in 1899 as a selection from the first crop of Eureka Extra 
Early. 



86 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



As grown at the Station in 1922 and 1923. a typical Extra 
Earlv. differing in no essential characteristic Brora the average of 
the type. The ster ■nictimcs branched at the base, and 

the pods, though well filled, were, perhaps, more rounded than 
blunt or square at the ends. 

McLean t > > — i and Beat. Ref 139. In a test of peas 
in England in 1901. McLean First and Best was found a " fortnight 
earlier than Sangster No. 1 " 

Perfection. Refs. 240; Grey Car. 1913. Perfection, 
cataloged and given in Tracy s list of 1901, is a typical Extra Early 
in pod, seed, and season; but the plant is very short, from 1 ' 2 to 
1 1 tert 111 height. It apparently differs, in this respect, from the 
Perfection given as a synonym for Maud S, and from Taber Per- 
fection, a Sangster No. 1 type pea. while the seeds are too round 
and too small for Harrison Perfection. Practically all of the very 
numerous other Perfection peas are of the wrinkled type. 

Special Extra Early. Ref. 247. As described by Michel] 
in 1902. his Special was earlier than other Extra Earlies. only 2 
feet high, an immense cropper, with tender peas of highest quality. 

Grown here recently for three seasons it was as tall as other 
strain 2 1 feet; began to flower low, 7th node; with a few 

basal branches; foliage abundant, between medium and light green 
in color; pods rarely in pairs, short. 2 to 2 ' •_> inches; peas small, 5 
to 7 in a pod; occasionally compressed, light green; seeds somewhat 
pitted and indented. It was nearer a second than a first early, but 
matured its crop promptly. 

Ki'tiiiy Extra Earl] Ref. 248' was grown for a cooking 
test in South Dakota in 1903. It originated with Keeney, probably 
just before 1903. 

It was 2' 4 feet high, among the earliest, with pods 3 inches 
long and more than half an inch wide, averaging only 5.1 per vine, 
and containing 5.9 peas of poor quality. — not tender nor sweet, 
but dry. starchy and tasteless. i,See Pedigree Extra Early and 
First in Market. 

Northwest Premier Ref. 249' was introduced prior to 1901 
by May. It was said to be " 10 days earlier than any other pea; 
an immense cropper, with pods of same attractive color as the 
vine; " but no actual test records of it have been found. It was 
listed in 1901 by several seedsmen. 

triumph Refs. 250, 251 I was listed in 1901, probably before 
by Griffith & Turner,' as Extra Early Triumph. 

As grown at this Station in 1922 and 1923, an early type, 
about 2 feet high, unbranched; pods small 1 1 ' „ to l r 's inches), 
typically shaped from 8th or 9th node, single; peas 5 to 6, rather 
large; seeds largely green, decidedly pitted or almost wrinkled. The 
crops of pods were good. 

Good Luck. Ref. 252. In or before 1905, J. Bolgiano intro- 
duced Good Luck as being much better than Alaska in many ways. 

As grown here for three seasons, from the introducers' seed, 
it was a good type of Landreth Extra Early, but occasionally 
branching, with leaflets sometimes in twos only, flowering lower on 
the plants 8th node 1 and more freely, and producing pods averaging 
hardly as long, but slightly more plump; so that the equally numer- 
ous peas are a little larger. No increased productivity could be 
noted, but Good Luck was a day or two earlier than Landreth Extra 
Early. 

Pedigree Mr«i ami Beat Ref. 253 was called " the standard 
extra early pea." It is probably identical with Pedigree Extra Early. 

Monarch «>f Earliea Ref. 254 1 appears to have been first 
cataloged by Isbell in 1906 — as a " grand extra early " of moderate 
height, ripening evenly; dry seed slightly wrinkled. 



As grown here for two seasons Monarch of Earlies seemed inter- 
mediate between the Extra Earlies and Marrowfats, having about 
the same vine characteristics, the earliness and the small seeds of 
the former, and the long, pointed, often also dorsally pointed, pods 
of the Marrowfats. The pods filled poorly, making the variety a 
poor cropper. 

Earl) Dixie (Ref. 255) undoubtedly originated before 1911. 
as it was then said to be popular witli Southern market gardeners; 
but was not listed by Tracy in 1902. It was an extra early with 
well tilled, light green pods. 

Maximua. Refs. 258; letter of Tait, Dec. 18,1926. Maxi- 
mus was selected from the old Despot sometime before 1913, as 
a pea for fall growth in the South. It is a full picking later than 
the true extra earlies, but makes a profuse setting of broad, very 
thick pods. It is now superseded. 

Mauretania. Ref. 259. Origin unknown, but since the 
steamship for which it is named made the Transatlantic record in 
1910. the variety undoubtedly originated between that year and 
1913 when it was cataloged. It may be of English origin, since 
seed of it was received from British Columbia. 

It was described by Leonard as very early, 2 to 2 > 3 feet high, 
with light green pods 2 1 £ inches long, blunt, and small, white, smooth 
seeds. It was called a great improvement over First and Best, which 
it greatly resembles. 

As grown here, sown May 22, pods were ready in 40 days, our 
record; and sown May 1 next year, it was 52 days to first picking. 
The earliness was joined with very short vines, 10 to 15 inches, and 
short pods, 1 ' 2 to 2 inches, broad, with pointed to rounded ends, 
which contained 2 to 3 peas to a pod; but the following season gave 
somewhat taller vines and larger pods. The peas and seeds were 
larger than those of typical Extra Earlies. The foliage was very 
scanty and very light green. 

From our experience Mauretania is not a promising variety, 
as the yield of peas was very small through poor filling of the pods. 
Earliness might commend it. 

Blue Ribbon Chieftain. Refs. 260; letter W. P. Stubbs, 
Dec. 9, 1926. Wood, Stubbs & Co. introduced Blue Ribbon 
Chieftain about 1913. W. P. Stubbs says it was a selected strain 
of the First and Best type. 

Although a typical Extra Early in nearly all respects, its pods 
are not quite so blunt as those of most of the group, and are more 
frequently in pairs, giving a very good yield. The seeds are also 
more or less mixed with green-skinned ones. The introducer claims 
dwarfness of plants, deep green color and greater length of pods and 
greater number of peas to the pod; but these characteristics were 
not markedly shown in the variety as grown here for two seasons. 

Record Breaker. Ref. 261. This strain of Extra Early was 
" worked up " for fall planting by Williams and listed in 1918, 
but was discarded as unsatisfactory (letter from sales manager) 
after two years' test. 

Peerless Extra Early (Ref. 262) was described in 1918 as 
round seeded, absolutely free from runners, 2}i feet high. 

Eversure iRef. 263 1 was cataloged in 1924 by Galloway as 
" a grand new pea; a first early, growing 2 feet high, a tremendous 
yielder, withstanding drought very well." 

Vllan Extra Early. According to a letter from the J. H. 
Allan Seed Co., Nov. 22, 1926, their many named and unnamed 
extra early peas are now continued by selecting the best strain and 
placing it on the market as Allan Extra Early. Dexter. Maud S, 
Saxonia, Sunol, etc., are among the names thus discarded. 



MINOR VARIETIES OF TOM THUMB GROUP 



l>*arf Brittany. Refs. 7-10. Except for a trial of two 
strains at this Station by Prof. Goff in 1884. Dwarf Brittany may 
not have been grown in America; but it was early cultivated in 
France and is still found there. It crossed to England but appar- 
ently did not find favor. 

Quite similar to Spanish Dwarf, later, ripening over a shorter 
season, very prolific for the size of the plants, and with slightly 
Larger, better colored pods. 

Earl) l)»..irf. This name includes several varieties, some- 
tunes Bishop Dwarf under one of its true or erroneous synonyms. 



sometimes an introduction with or without its originator's or 
introducer's name. Some of these varieties came to America but 
were so indefinitely listed, cataloged and described that it is impos- 
sible now to segregate them. 

Paxton's Horticultural Register C»:207. 1834) describes an 
Early Dwarf: 

Height l'j to 2 feet, with rather slender, short-jointed stems, 
small dark green leaves, small tendrils, short petioles, and short 
peduncles bearing two flowers which produce small, roundish, 
slightly curved pods. It was " middling " early, a good bearer of 
peas of good quality changing to very small, white seeds. 



this company, of Nov. 20, 1926. says Triumph was introduced by J. Bolgiano " more than thirty years ago.' 




Vine and pods of field pea 



OPENSHAW 



(Nearly natural size> 




Stocky stem, dark foliage. Urge flowers 



JOHNSON GLORY 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



87 



Sinclair in 1839 catalogs under this name what may be the 
same variety, with the synonym " Six Weeks; " and also lists in 
1839 Paris New Early Dwarf. Douglas in 1843 also lists an 
" Early Dwarf " as " earliest and very productive." 

In the Gardeners' Chronicle for 1844 (p. 66) Thompson 
Early Dwarf is advertised; and in 1849 this was tested in the 
gardens of the Horticultural Society of London {Journal of that 
Society. 1:270). 

Height 2 feet, second early, with small round pods contain- 
ing 4 5 medium sized peas, tolerably prolific, but not equal to 
Bishop Long-pod. This or another Early Dwarf was described in 
Gardeners' Chronicle for 1850, as bearing small, rather broad 
pods, usually with five peas, of good quality, very prolific and some- 
times flowering at second or third node. It was said to be superior 
to Spanish Dwarf and to Bishop Dwarf, although Nain hat if 
and L'Evergne are given as synonyms, and the latter is the (mis- 
spelled i French name for Bishop Dwarf. 

Thompson (Card. Asst. 319. 1859) describes an Improved 
Early Dwarf as really an improvement over his Early Dwarf or 
Bishop Dwarf because of its greater productivity and larger peas. 

Country Gentleman in 1857 and in 1862 gives brief notes 
on Comstock Early Dwarf: 

Remarkably early, with rather large pods containing 6 to 
7 peas, and very productive. In the very hot dry season of 1856, 
this variety, sown on June 2, furnished edible peas in 38 days and 
matured in 51 days. 

The Very Early Dwarf described by Goff in 1884, was said 
to be " probably Nain tres hatif a chassis (Vilm)," a forcing 
strain of Spanish Dwarf. 

Queen of the Dwarfs. Refs. 30; Thorburn Car. 1873; 
Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:91. 1873. Queen of the Dwarfs was 
introduced in 1845 by Waite, and later was said to have originated 
with Dr. McLean, from a cross between Beck Gem and a marrow 
pea. Tho mentioned in American periodicals much earlier, it was 
apparently not sold here until 1873. Hogg says it was very tender 
to cold, subject to aphis and generally unworthy. 

It was very dwarf, reaching only 3 4 foot in height; stem 
thick, succulent, sometimes branching, and foliage of a dark, blue- 
green color; pods few, short and broad, giving them a peculiar 
elliptical appearance, peas only 3 or 4, very large; seed white, egg- 
shaped and irregularly compressed. It was a poor bearer and 
late. 

Strawberry. Refs. 36, 37. There were evidently several 
Strawberry peas in America, nearly all dwarf, and poor producers 
of small, poorly flavored, smooth, white peas; but one strain, said 
not to be Tom Thumb, grown in 1861, was quite early and full of 
pods. Some of the strains, Strawberry Vine in particular, were 
field peas, distinct from Field Creeper. 

Peabody. Refs. 38: Jour. Hort. 48:380. 1872; Country 
Gent. 38:278. 1873.) When first introduced Peabody was said 
to be: 

Very dwarf, 1 •4 feet tall and of Tom Thumb habit, branching, 
with many small bright green leaflets; pods small, rather narrow, 



deep green, well filled; peas 6 or 7, small; prolific and late. Subse- 
quent references in both England and America make it 2} •> feet tall. 

Dwarf Waterloo. Refs. 39, 40; Gard. Mo. 16:40. 1874. 
Introduced about 1866; was said by one observer to be a dwarf 
form of Royal Victory or Waterloo Marrow; and by another to be 
a much improved Bishop Long-pod. It was listed in America in 
1869, tried in 1874, and called one of the best of the second early 
dwarfs, a splendid cropper but not equal in flavor to Burbridge 
Eclipse. 

Garden Pride. Refs. 41; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 5:248. 1887; 
also manuscript notes of this Station, 1886. Introduced by John- 
son & Stokes about 1883 and tested at this Station and elsewhere. 
Since it was not listed by the introducers in their catalog of 1892, 
it was evidently not a popular pea. 

It was very dwarf, stocky-stemmed, 1 to lj^ feet tall; foliage 
rather deep green, leaflets large toward base of plant but very small 
toward the tip; pods often paired, short, broad, very plump, pale 
green, not always well filled; peas rather large, of quality not inferior 
to Little Gem or American Wonder; seeds were large and nearly 
smooth. Quite early. 

Very Dwarf Cotourier (Ref. 42) was grown in America 
probably only at this Station, where it was tested in 1884. It is 
still grown in France. 

It was very dwarf and stocky, with exceedingly short inter- 
nodes, very deep green foliage and very small leaflets, glaucous 
stipules usually not whitened, pods very pale, very short, plump and 
blunt ended, quite abundant, produced in midseason, maturing 
gradually and containing 4 to 6 almost white, roundish, compressed 
peas and very smooth seeds showing the radicle conspicuously. 

Dwarf Prize (Refs. 43, 44) appears to have been listed from 
1889 to 1922. It was said to be 1^ 4 feet tall, a stout, productive 
extra early, ideal for home gardens. The two references may refer 
to different peas. 

McNeil (Refs. 45, 46) originated in Lake City, Fla., before 
1891; but came to us from Georgia as Florida McNeil. It is largely 
grown in the south as a market gardeners' late pea. 

This pea duplicates Horal in size and habit of plants, character 
and color of foliage, size and shape of pods, number and size of peas, 
productivity and season; but the pods and peas are light in color 
and the seeds smooth and cream-colored. 

Dwarf Rural New Yorker (Ref. 47) was introduced in 1892 
by Alexander as a cross between Rural New Yorker and Little 
Gem, only a foot tall and very productive. 

Annonay Very Early. Refs. 48-50. Since notice of this 
pea was found in an American catalog and it was known to be 
obtainable, seed of it was secured from France and it was grown 
here for three years. 

It is a typical Tom Thumb in seed, height of plant, abundance 
and character of foliage, shape of pod, and general appearance of 
peas; but was somewhat later in season, and the pods were shorter. 

Northern Wonder (Ref. 51) was said on introduction, before 
1913, to be the finest dwarf, smooth pea yet produced; compact 
and dwarf in growth, 10 inches tall, early and very productive. 



MINOR VARIETIES OF MARROWFAT GROUP 



SEEDS WHITE 

Rose or Crown. Refs. 27 36; Amer. Agr. 28:45. 1869; 
Cent. Expt. Farm (Can.) Bui. 39. 1902; Evans Car. 1904. 
Rose or Crown, the " Scottish or tufted pease " of Parkinson, 
long and widely grown as a curiosity, has little real value, but is 
sometimes used as a field pea. The name Mummy, a synonym 
of Crown, connects the variety with an unbelievable tale of viable 
peas found in the dust in an Egyptian vase supposed to be nearly 
3,000 years old. (See Grimstone Egyptian.) The lower joints of 
the stem of the Crown pea are very long, but the upper ones are 
much enlarged, often flattened (fasciated) and much shortened, 
so that the paired or clustered flowers and pods are borne at the 
top of the plant. 

One of two quite distinct strains has white flowers and white 
seeds, approaching the Marrowfats in general characters, altho the 
pods are shorter and peas smaller; the other has pale rose-colored 
or, in Painted Lady, bicolored flowers, with gray seeds following 
peas unpalatable because of rather acrid, wild taste. The plants 
were usually 5 feet or more tall, gave a very good crop of pods late 



in the season for garden peas, and matured about midseason for 
field pea uses. 

The gray-seeded Mummy pea was grown here for two seasons 
but considered only a field pea. 

Lady Finger (Refs. 37, 38, 39) is an old variety formerly 
grown in England, France and America. 

No description of it is available; but De Marly, which it 
resembles, was a tall pea, 5 Jo to 6 feet, with straight, plump pods of 
Marrowfat type about 3 inches long, rather blunt-ended, with the 
large peas " mounding " the sides of the pod. It was ready to use 
in late midseason, and not very productive. Seeds white. 

Matchless Marrowfat. Refs. 40-44; Lawson Agr. Man. 
79. 1834; Gard. Chron. 344. 1845; 1017. 1859; and 292. 1865; 
Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 542, 543. 1863. This pea was listed in 
1827 in an American catalog; and Lawson says in 1834 that it 
was recently introduced by Warner. 

Height 3 to 4 feet, unbranched; pods straight, 3 inches long, 
very wide, but plump; peas 6-7, large; seeds compressed, irregularly 
shaped, sometimes slightly wrinkled, white and olive in color. Later 



88 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



references, particularly American, make it taller. It bore 13 bo 
16 pods to the plant, usually paired; very productive, ready in 
midseason or later. 

^fat. advertised in 1841. and Stradsett Marrow, 
considerably later, at first seemed to differ slightly from Matchless 
Marrowfat: but in the Chiswick trials of 1860 \\<n considered 
identical with it. All were said to be disappearing in England in 
1865. Matchless Marrowfat and Milford Marrow were described 
by Burr, but except that the pods of the latter were liable to thin 
out and shrivel rather than to increase in plumpness when ready 
tgnificant differences between these varieties were 
They were probably soon superseded by the wrinkled 
marrows. Matchless Marrowfat is also the name of a wrinkled 
pea. See p. 100. 

Shilling Grotto. Rrfs. 45 49; Burr Fid Card. Veg. 547. 
1863; Hogg Omid. Yr. Bk. 11:76. 187J. Shilling Grotto was 
introduced about 1843 as a cross between the old Grotto, or Oyster 
pea. and Early Frame. 

It was said in early references to have short, broad pods, but 
later authorities make the pods 3';> inches long, one-half inch wide, 
thick -hacked and rather quadrangular in form, typically Marrowfat ; 
and the other characteristics of plant and seed place the variety 
in this group. The pods were deceptive, becoming very plump 
long before the peas were edible. Hogg says the plants were 4 ' _> to 
5 feet tall, single-stemmed, of strong habit of growth. 

Tho described by Burr. Shilling Grotto was probably grown 
in America only on a limited scale. 

The Oyster pea. or Mossy-podded pea, was so called from a 
roughness of the outer pod similar to that of an oyster shell, often 
with a dark green incrustation, especially in wet weather, which 
could be at least partially rubbed off. This was probably some 
form of mildew or other superficial fungus whose spores found 
favorable germinating conditions in the rough outer skin of the 
pod. This pea antedates Shilling Grotto by at least ten years, 
and is credited to Field 6t Child, London. 

i arolina Ref. 50' may not be distinct from Large, or Tall, 
Carolina, synonymous with Tall Marrowfat. The name, alone, 
connects it with America. 

Lawson makes it shorter-vined, shorter-podded and smaller- 
seeded than the typical Marrowfats of the time; and says it was 
used as a field pea. 

Wellington. Refs. 51; Hogg Card. Yr. Bk. 11:81. 1873. 
Wellington is mentioned in some American literature as a synonym 
of other peas grown here: but it probably was not cultivated under 
its own name. Hogg gives Wellington as a synonym of Victoria 
Marrow. 

Lawson says its seeds were the largest white peas and rather 
oblong or bean-shaped; otherwise a typical Marrowfat. 

Branching Marrow. Refs. 52 58; Card. Chron. 53. 
1850. Branching Marrow and Dwarf Branching Marrow have 
not been recorded in America, except thru synonyms. The variety 
and its dwarf form were probably not distinct, tho the heights 
given run from 1 ' ■• to 6 feet. Common synonyms connect the 

names and a very dwarf form was described under the un- 
modified name. Both early and late references give figures for a 
dwarf type: so that the confusion in synonyms can not be due alone 
to reversion to a taller form. The variety was in cultivation for 
30 years, and was of true Marrowfat type, but quite early. It is 

•crest chiefly as being the pea selected by the unknown origi- 
nator of the " Mummy " pea hoax. See Grimstone Egyptian. 

\iiiiri,.in Marrow Ref. 65 1 was 2 feet tall, ready in 110 
days from March 28: free and fine. 

Monastery. Refs. 68; Thorbum Cat. 1847. Dancer's Mon- 
astery was advertised in 1845 by Fames, and was called new in 
America in 1 - 

is a white marrow pea. 6-7 feet tall, earlier than Tall 
h large pods in succession, each with 7 to 8 
large peas of good quality. 

Iroostooii Marrow f..t Ref. 69> was said in 1888 to be of 
true Marrowfat type in vine, free from mildew, and with more or 
less wrinkled seeds showing cross-breeding; very productive, earlier 
and more profitable than Champion of England, selling well in 
market. 



Thurston Reliance. Refs. 63; Gard. Chron. 761. 1848; 
Strong Cat. 1852; Cof. Gard. 25:291. 1861; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 
549. 1863; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk 11:80. 1873. Tho Thurston 
Reliance was considered later only a synonym of Victoria Marrow, 
it was announced as a new variety in 1848 by Thurston. It was 
probably a carefully bred selection from the older variety. In trials 
at Chiswick when at least a decade old, it was considered a distinct 
and useful pea. 

Height 6 7 feet, strong and robust in growth, unbranched, 
Bowering from 3 feet to top of plant, with longer, bright green, 
smooth pods usually single, and more peas to the pod than Victoria 
Marrow; pods very broad and flat, slightly curved but appearing 
more so by the long curve of the outer edge. 

Princess Royal. Refs. 73; Amer. A&r. 2.1:116. 1864. This 
was one of Dr. McLean's crosses of Beck Gem and a marrow pea, 
said to have been introduced in 1860. In America it was said to 
resist mildew much better than Champion of England. According 
to Hogg, its pods filled poorly. 

It was a second-early or mid-season variety, 2^£ to 3 feet tall, 
with single or sometimes paired large, broad, straight pods, round- 
or blunt ended, with rather heavy tips, and containing 7 8 large 
peas of excellent quality. The seeds were typical large marrowfats. 

Great Eastern iRef. 75 1 was "inferior to peas resembling 
the old Marrowfat with which it was compared." 

Good Marrow Ref. 76) was announced in 1862 as new. 

Height 4'^ feet, peas edible in 8 weeks, of good flavor; pods 
long and rather narrow. 

Krfurl Earl} Dwarf White Marrow Ref. 781, according to 
manuscript notes, was grown at this Station in 1886, from seeds 
sent by Haage St, Schmidt, probably the introducers. It was 
unlike other Marrowfats in having strongly curved pods borne on 
short peduncles. Other vine, pod and pea characters were those 
of the marrows; but lacking seed description, it is uncertain whether 
it was a wrinkled or smooth marrow. 

Short-Strait Marrow. Refs. 79; Landreth Cat. 1889; 
Kans. Sta. Rpt. 2:153, 160. 1889. This pea probably originated 
with Landreth in or just prior to 1889. It was introduced too late 
to be included in the early pea tests at this Station; and is now not 
listed. 

Stem strong-growing, succulent, 2 to 2)^ feet high, often 
branched, foliage light bluish-green, whitened, with 2 4 leaflets, 
entire or toothed, and often with a curled or tendril-like tip; pods 
frequently paired, 2j/£ to 3 inches long, broad, not evenly filled, 
peas 4 to 7 of good quality: seeds smooth, yellow. Second-early, 
ready in 64 days from early sowing or 58 from late sowing. 

Giant I'odilid Marrow. Refs. 82, 83; Johnson & Stokes 
Cat. 1892; Rural N. Y. 55:546. 1896. The introducers, Johnson 
& Stokes, claimed extreme dwarfness for Giant Podded Marrow, 
which other references sustain, and pods from 7 to 8 inches long, 
which others found only 3j^ to 4 inches. At the Station they were 
shorter than those of ordinary marrowfats. 

California Marrowfat i Ref. 88a) was listed in 1913 by 
the California Seed Co., but may have been only a strain of White 
Marrowfat. 

Mammot Ii-I'<mI<I«-<I Suyar Marrowfat. Ref. 87. Buck- 
bee claims credit for this pea, which originated in 1911; but aside 
from length of pods 4 to 5 inches), their abundance, uniformity 
and good color, no separatory characters are given. 

These points could not be confirmed from our Station tests of 
1925, and the height, 5 to 5^£ feet, was decidedly greater than the 
introducer's figure for the variety. It is large-seeded and the 
seeds show rather more wrinkling than most other marrowfats, 
indicating possible better quality, as implied by the name. This 
point was not tested here. 

Earl] Sugar Marrowfat 'Ref. 88) was first listed in America 
by Moore & Simon in 1907; but the seed came from England. 
Earliness, dwarfness and profuse bearing were claimed for it, as 
well as large size and beauty of pods. It is still carried by the 
introducers; but apparently has not found general favor. 

Springtide Ref. 89 i originated with Carter in 1904. from 
a Telephone x Exonian cross, both wrinkled peas, but giving as 
progeny this pea of the marrowfat type with pitted or slightly 
wrinkled, large, light cream-colored seeds. It might be classed 
also cither as Dimpled or as Wrinkled. Cream-seeded. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



89 



Height 2 to 2j£ feet; stems short, sparingly branched at the 
base, leaflets in 4s, large, and stipules much larger, sharp tipped, 
glaucous and whitened; flowers greenish-white, from 8th node, 
sometimes paired but the pods rarely so; latter 3 to 3'_j inches long, 
quite broad, very plump and often saddle-backed, straight or slightly 
curved, with rather sharp-pointed ends, often dorsally slanted also, 
with small tips; peas 4 or 5, large, very smooth, round, oval longi- 
tudinally, good glistening green in color and of fair quality. In 
our trials in 1926, from seed grown at McMillan, Mich., Springtide 
gave a good to very good, early crop. 

White-eyed -Marrowfat (Ref. 90) seems to be listed in the 
catalogs of one American seedsman only, Allan. It is undoubtedly 
more grown as a field pea than in the garden. 

As described by Allan its hardy, vigorous vine, 3j^ to 4 feet 
tall, bears rather leathery pods near the top, these being 3 inches 
long, blunt -ended, and light green in color. As grown in the Station 
garden for three seasons, from seed raised at the Idaho Station, it 
was of good marrowfat type, 3 feet tall, flowering at the 11th node 
and producing quite large pods and peas. When sown May 22, 
it produced edible pods in 55 days: but from earlier sowings required 
nearly nine weeks. The crops were only poor to fair. The seeds 
were rather large, long, approaching oval, and very smooth, whitish 
cream in color, but without any noticeable whiteness about the eye. 

SEEDS BLACK EYED 
Spanish Mullato. Refs. 96-100. This pea, of Spanish 
origin or coming from Spain to England and France, was of tall, 
large-seeded, black-eyed type, one of the " leading peas at first 
tables during reign of George I." With Egg, was " the poor man's 
pea, being the most hardy and abundant bearers." For a long 
time in England peas were rich men's luxuries. 

MINOR VARIETIES 

Blue Imperial. Refs. 13-17; Mich. Sta. But 131:31. 
1896. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 1:87. 1883. Blue Imperial probably 
came from Blue Prussian, but has larger leaves, stronger growing 
plants and shorter season. It presumably originated shortly 
before it was cataloged in America, in 1824, as Grand Imperial. 

As described a decade later, it was 3 to 4 feet high (with a 
dwarf form 2 to 3 feet high), unbranched, with short joints; leaves of 
medium size, dark glaucous green; flowers paired, decidedly green- 
ish, on short peduncles; pods large, dark green, well filled with peas 
of good quality, changing to light blue seeds, large and somewhat 
flattened. Ready at the same time (about 110 days) as Blue Prus- 
sian but of shorter season; an abundant bearer. As grown at this 
Station in 1882, and again during three of the past four years, the 
season was much earlier, 76-79 days; plants 3}/£ to 4 feet high, 
vigorous, with internodes of medium length, abundant medium 
green foliage, slightly glaucous but not whitened; greenish white 
flowers in pairs at 17th to 18th node on short stocky peduncles; 
pods 2 s s to 3 inches long, of moderate width but plump and well 
filled, straight, square ended with large straight tips, slightly lighter 
in color than foliage, and containing 5-7 medium to small, light 
green peas, round to oval and somewhat compressed; seeds semi- 
smooth, greenish blue with a few cream colored, oblong, flattened. 

The yields were good to very good, making a very satisfactory 
field pea. The cooking quality was not tested. 

Bedman Imperial (Refs. 17, 18), developed before 1840, 
and New Imperial (Ref. 19), about 1847, were, respectively, better 
than the parent type, Blue Imperial, and not as good. Both were 
listed in America, but not much grown. The former (Jour. Hort. 
Soc. London, 1:272. 1849) was more dwarf than Blue Imperial and 
had slightly curved pods; the latter was taller, later and with small, 
cylindrical pods. 

Imperial Blue (Refs. 20, 21) is allied by descent to Blue 
Prussian, and by synonymy to other varieties in the Alaska group; 
but its characteristics seem to place it with the Dimpled-seeded 
peas, and it is discussed under that group. 

June. Refs. 32, 33 A June pea was described, briefly, in 
1857 as being larger than the common field pea, earlier, and produc- 
ing more peas with less straw; and an Early June, which is also a 
synonym of Early Dwarf or Early Washington, was listed in 1902. 

Since seed of Early June secured in 1922 from the firm adver- 
tising the pea in 1902 was greenish blue in color, it is evident that 
June and Early June are name and synonym, reversibly, of two 
varieties, one an Extra Early and the other of Alaska type. 

In the Station tests the green-seeded variety was ready for 
use in 57 days when sown on April 27th or May 1st, or in 10 days 
less time when sown on May 22. 



Said to be 5-6 feet tall, rather slender in vine, with small, 
slightly curved, nearly round pods, containing 7 medium sized to 
large peas, " tolerably good if gathered when young." The seeds 
were yellow, round, and black-eyed. It was very late. 

Nonsuch (Refs. 101, 102, 104), commonly known as Pearl, 
is now grown only as a field pea, often used for " splitting; " and still 
among the better late varieties for the purpose in Canada. Its 
history dates far back, and its origin is unknown. 

It was originally much like Tall White Marrowfat, but with 
flowers, pods and their stalks smaller and shorter, and with the 
seeds black-eyed The seeds themselves were quite large, the pods 
being thin-walled and compact. It was very late but bore abun- 
dantly. Later, the smaller-seeded, shorter-vined strains became more 
prominent as better suited to field culture, but the season was not 
shortened. 

Peruvian Black Eye Marrow. Refs. Ill, 112; N. Y. Sta. 
Rpt. 1: 186. 1885, and mss. notes. From any available descriptions, 
no separation can be made of this variety from the common Black- 
eyed Marrowfat. It is probable that the name merely indicates 
more clearly an American origin for the smaller-seeded black-eyed 
peas. 

Telegraph (Ref. 113), of marrowfat type, very unlike the 
dimpled-seeded pea of the same name, originated about 1860, 
and when tried in the garden of the Royal Horticultural Society 
was said to be " like Early Emperor in all respects, except for black 
hilum, like Egg; " which would make it a typical black-eyed marrow- 
fat, with rather small, blunt-ended pods. The peas also had the 
rough, " beany " taste of Egg. 

IN ALASKA GROUP 

The vines were shorter (2 feet) and slenderer than those of 
Earliest of All, Nonpareil, or the Alaskas, but similar in other 
respects; and produced many small white flowers, beginning at the 
10th node, borne both singly and in pairs, followed by small pods 
(2 l 4 to 2 3 4 inches) which were otherwise typical Alaskas. The 
peas were of medium size, smooth, round, and could hardly be 
distinguished from those of Alaska. Early June gave very good 
crops of its small pods; but cannot be specially recommended for 
either garden or field culture. 

Kentish. Seed under this name was sent us from the trial 
grounds of the United States Department of Agriculture at McMil- 
lan, Mich., and it was tested in 1926, proving an inferior Alaska- 
type pea, taller, with a few basal branches, and single, short, plump 
pods, 2 to 25 8 inches long which wrinkled early. They contained 
about 5 light green peas that lost color in cooking and were of poor 
quality. About one-fourth of the seeds were cream-colored. This 
may be Kentish Invicta; but comparison of the two in the United 
States Department of Agriculture tests in 1928 showed some 
differences. 

Griffin. Refs. 37; Jour. Hort. 18:401. 1872. We find 
no notice of Griffin in America; but include it here as another 
Laxton addition to a numerous group of Alaska type peas originated 
by various growers and breeders at about the same time. It was 
said to resemble the Frame peas, with simple stems, 3 to 4 feet 
high; pods 14 to 16, rather short, generally paired; peas 6 or 7, 
medium sized, of mottled appearance through mixture of light and 
dark green; and not well flavored. The same mottling appeared 
on the small, dark seeds. It was as early as Sangster No. 1. 

Carter Invicta (Ref. 38) was probably introduced by Carter, 
and undoubtedly of Kentish Invicta type, and so, like Alaska. In 
extensive trials on the grounds of one of the nobility it was called 
very good but it did not win " highly commended." 

First Crop Blue. Refs. 39, Gard. Mo. 16:40. 1874. This 
is another Carter pea, introduced very soon after Invicta, quite 
widely grown in England and tested in America in 1874. It resem- 
bled Burbridge Eclipse, was 1^ to 2 feet tall, robust, bearing 8 
or 9 single or paired, short, broad, slightly curved, blunt-ended, 
light green pods. It was as early as Daniel O'Rourke, of better 
flavor. 

Smilax (Ref. 43), originating with Alexander, about 1885, 
was apparently of Alaska type, but often branched from the root, 
giving two 3 -foot stems. It was later and more productive than 
Alaska, with paired pods sometimes containing 10 peas which held 
their green color after boiling. It was not uniform in type. 



90 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



1,,-t .iii.I Earliest. Rcfs. 44: Rural New Yorker 11:756. 
1885. Tl: bsbly the variety in the small packets of the 

pea later known as Alaska, some of which were sold in Europe 
rvcland. at the rate of >4-' per bushel. As tested in England 
.s found I truer than Laxton Earliest of All, and a 

but apparently attracted no attenl 
1 in America unless as Alaska. 
I M K.ts Wood, Stubbs C.it 1902; Vita 

Gard. 506 1920 This greenish seeded E\; 
is apparently American, as it was first me n t i one d in a test lure in 

as Bliss' N ' may have differed from Laxton Earliest 

in longer seuv^n, some pods rather small, and slightly larger 

seeds. It did ivx.rly from seed sent here in l u 2-> from British 

ibia. and this Express was not found in current catalogs, so 

:i was secured. The second reference says it 

is among the first to mature and has long, straight pods, ripening 

rmly and well filled with peas of good quality. The French 

reference notes its resemblance to Prince Albert, with deep green 

seeds [1 - ■pot ently only another Alaska. 

M.uil. Earliest of VII. Refs. 50. Maule Cat. 1894. This 
pea was advertised as a very fine strain of extra early peas, very 
regular in growth and a good yiclder. It was tested at this Station 
in 1886 but the time of introduction is unknown. As grown here it 
was found " similar to Philadelphia Extra Early," overlooking the 
green color of the seeds sown. " but with stems frequently branched 
medially and with very long pod-stalks." The introducer calls it 
" an improved strain of Alaska," which could hardly have been 
true of the seeds tested here, since Alaska itself was then just 
introduced. 

It may have been Laxton's Earliest of All. 

Earliest Bine Ref. 51 was offered by Sutton in 1886, as the 
earliest of its class and very productive. The medium sized, blunt- 
ended pods and greenish blue seeds prove it of Alaska type; and the 
new strain of it, introduced by Sutton in 1915, and grown here in 
1924. is a short-stemmed, short- and broad-podded, large-seeded 
Alaska pea. yielding well. Seed of it has been substituted for that 
of Alaska without creating comment. It is possibly a day or two 
later in season and crops longer. 

» Upper. Ref. 52; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:331. 1888. Rawson 
introduced Clipper, probably in 1886. Trials proved it identical 
with Alaska or unlike only by " infinitesimal differences." Syden- 
ham's " The Clipper " is a wrinkled pea. 

\. I.. on ■•• Ref. 53 , received here in 1887 from the U. S. 
Department of Agriculture, was found identical with Alaska. 

Hlii, Beauty. Refs. 54; Kans. Sta. Rpt. 2:157; Daniels 
• 1892. Blue Beauty is probably an English pea, tho cataloged 
at about the same time, 1888, by Daniels Bros., and by Henderson. 
Most of the early records are American. 

As grown at this Station in 1888, it resembled Tom Thumb in 
habit and size of plants and Alaska in shape and size of pods and 
color of peas. Other records say its vines were shorter than those 
of Alaska, with bluish green foliage, and that it was two or three 
days later than Alaska, and very productive. 

Mill, tli Pride Refs. 55, 56 . introduced by Ferry about 
1888. was tested at the Indiana and Kansas Stations and found 
similar to Earliest of All, but more dwarf, two or three days later, 
and with smaller pods. It soon disappeared. 

Sitka. Refs. 57; Landreth Cat. 1892. Sitka was grown with 
Alaska at the Kansas Station in 1889 and appeared very similar, 
tho identity of the two was not stated, and the next year the pods 
were held shorter and slightly curved, and crop later. The Land- 
reth seed firm pronounced them the same. 

Electors) Ref B was introduced by Dreer in 1898, as a green- 
seeded pea of the Alaska type, earlier and bearing longer pods. 

As gri.wn in 'rsts here in 1922 and 1924 it is a good, uniform 
Alaska-type pea with rather small seeds, not earlier nor with longer 
pods, but these are possibly a little better in color. 

• Ik r R-f 59 was put out in 1900, with rather exorbitant 
claims for earliness. by Salzer. 

-sted here in 1922. 1923. and 1924. it differed from Alaska 
in no marked way. tho it was a little taller, its foliage rather more 
glaucous, and its stipules larger. It was no earlier. 



Rapid I .«• Rapide . Refs. 60; Denaiffe L. P P 1906; Simon- 
Louis Frcres Or. 1922 ii. Seeds of this pea are considerably 
pitted. It was introduced about 1900, probably by Simon-Louis 
Freres, Bruycres-lc-Chatel, France. 

Except foi slightly smaller size of plants and pods and rather 
scanty and lighter foliage, it is a typical member of the Alaska group, 
most resembling Extra Early Nonpareil. The greenish (lowers 
indicate descent, in a rather more direct line than Alaska's, from 
Blue Prussian. 

Largo-podded Uaska. Refs. 61, 62; South Dakota Sta. 
Bui. 91:7. 1905. Large-podded Alaska originated in Ontario, 
Canada, and was introduced into the United States by Johnson Ss 
Stokes in 1903. 

As tested in South Dakota in 1904 and as grown here in 
recent years it is essentially true to its name, altho 3 or 4 days 
later than Alaska and picking longer. The pod is fully a half-inch 
longer than that of Alaska, less plump, rounded or pointed at the 
end ratlur than blunt or square, the tip much smaller and the peas 
about the same but possibly of better quality. It is apparently a 
better market gardeners' pea than Alaska, later, but grown more in 
the South than in the North. 

Long-podded Alaska, apparently first listed by Meyer in 1913, 
as grown from two sources is more like the above variety than like 
Long-pod Alaska, but pods are slightly curved at the tip. 

Saginaw Vallej Pride. Ref. 63. The catalog claims 
" Earliest pea in America today; ripe in 35 days." This claim and 
the smooth, blue peas indicate an Earliest of All strain. 

Velocity Refs. 65; Maule Cat. 1910 is recorded as grown 
near Witham, England, and probably was introduced by Cooper- 
Taber. From several American descriptions dated very soon after 
its origination, and from its growth here, both in garden tests and as 
a canning pea, it is a typical but rather dwarf and short-podded 
Alaska, with pods less well filled and consequently more pointed, 
and rather smaller peas. 

Tho called very early, it proved rather later than Alaska in 
the field, and was ready at the same time in the garden. 

Both Sutton and Hurst have recently announced improved 
strains of Velocity. 

Lone Pod Uaska. Refs. 66; Tait Cat. 1918. As listed 
in 1910 by J. Bolgiano this variety was " similar to Extra Early 
Alaska; but having pods almost twice as long." As grown here 
for two seasons, not however from seed supplied by the introducer, 
it proved to be Alaska, the pods being only slightly, if any, longer 
than typical ones of the common variety. 

Other seedsmen give this name as a synonym of Claudit and 
Ameer of which the seeds are larger and dimpled. 

Concordia Ref. 67 1, listed and apparently originated by 
Allan, did not establish itself and was dropped in 1915. 

It was like Alaska in habit, pods and peas; but two weeks later; 
and the abundant pods were at the top of the plants, in these points 
resembling Horal. 

Goodwin Prizewinner iRef. 68 1 was listed in 1915 by the 
Champaign Seed Co., Champaign, 111., and described as 1)2 feet 
tall, a little later than Alaska, productive and with light green 
seeds. 

'* The Hustlers *' iRef. 69l originated with J. Bolgiano and 
was introduced in 1910. It is said to be a cross between Extra 
Early Alaska and Long-podded Alaska and to combine the earliness 
of one parent with the long pod of the other. 

It was grown for three years in our recent tests and found to 
be essentially a tall-vined Alaska, its pods somewhat resembling 
those of Long-podded Alaska in pointed, small-tipped ends but not 
equalling them in size. It was not as early as the better strains of 
Alaska, and not better in yield. 

Indianapolis Market Ref. 71 1, as listed by Tinsley in 191 1, 
was about 2' 2 feet high and like Alaska in general habit, but about 
a week later in maturing and with larger and broader pods, and 
round, light green seeds, " wrinkled." This latter, with the size 
of the pods, may make the variety more like Ameer than Alaska. 

McLean Kir»t of Ml Ref. 72 came from England, so is not 
Henderson First of All; but probably a very productive pea of the 
Alaska type. It is said to bear sometimes 150 pods to the plant. 

<.ianl l.\|>r. Refs. 73; Leonard Car. 1913. Giant 

Express, blue-seeded, and Giant Lightning, cream-seeded, were 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



91 



apparently introduced at the same time, about 1910, by Carter. 
They were real improvements, in size of pods, on Express and 
Lightning. Giant Express is taller in vine than Alaska, 4 J o to 5 
feet, with 3 ' 2-inch, rather broad, slightly curved pods. It was 
brought to America very shortly after its introduction in England; 
but has not been widely grown 

MINOR VARIETIES 
SEEDS CREAM 

Bunksian Marrow. Refs. 21; Thorburn Cat. 1861. In 

1860, in trials of the Royal Horticultural Society, Banksian Marrow 
was considered as practically identical with Scimitar, but straighter 
podded; but in 1867. ten years after its introduction, was called an 
improvement on it, without specifying in what respect. 

It was listed in America in 1861; but apparently little grown 
either in England or here. 

Etampes Wonder iRefs. 29, 30) was found in a sowing of 
peas made shortly before 1883 by M. Bonnemain of Etampes, 
France. It was widely cultivated in France; but not recorded in 
the United States except for our recent tests of it and one made here 
in 1884. 

It is much like Auvergne, but with longer, decidedly broader 
pods, holding width nearer to the point, better filled so that the 
more numerous peas i 7-9 ) are compressed in the pod. It is a mid- 
season variety, and one of the best yielders of the Scimitar group. 
The plants in our recent rest were about a foot taller than those 
grown in 1884. 

Glory of Cassel iRefs. 31, 32; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. U:75. 

1873 , a pea very much like White Scimitar, was sent to this Station 
for testing in 1886 by Haage & Schmidt; but an English reference 
calls it " new " in 1871. Hogg says Glory of Cassel was similar to 
Auvergne, but inferior to it and two days later. 

It was about 2 ] 2 feet tall, branched, with medium green, 
scarcely whitened foliage, with paired pods, 2j^ to 3 inches long, 
usually strongly curved, with rounded to blunt points, very plump, 
sometimes being thicker than wide, light green in color with marked 
bloom, and containing 6-8 roundish peas. Pods were ready in 
midseason and crop rather better than good. 

Gold von Blockshur*; (Ref. 341 was sent the Station for 
testing by the University of British Columbia in 1892; but we found 
no record of it except its listing by Haage & Schmidt in 1899, and 
its inclusion in Vilmorin-Robinson's Vegetable Garden in 1920 
as a German variety rather like White Scimitar 

As grown here it was 33 o feet tall, with medium to dark green 
foliage, the leaflets being very broad. The pods were very similar 
to those of Petit Pois, but not quite so long nor so slender, and 
were less well filled because of many abortive peas. The pods became 
noticeably yellow before ready for picking, the peas yellowish green, 
and the seeds deeper in color than other cream seeded peas. It was 
a midseason variety and fairly productive. 



SEEDS GREEN 

Batt Wonder. Refs. 22; Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 521. 1863; 
Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:88. 1873; Vilmorin-Robinson, 541. 1920. 
This pea attracted some attention and caused a dispute in England, 



Earliest Perfection iRefs. 74; Shumway Car. 1922) was 
listed by Shumway previous to 1902. From his description and 
figure, and from growth here for three seasons, it appears to be very 
similar to Market Surprise, but not quite so tall, a day or two later, 
and with almost dimpled, greenish blue seeds. The leaflets are not 
I quite so uniformly in 4s, and are larger and broader. 

IN SCIMITAR GROUP 

| is described by Burr, and has been grown in France for some time, 
being still retained in Vilmorin-Robinson. It was claimed and 
denied that it came from Woodford Green Marrow, but several 
years later it was held to be an improvement on that variety. 

Burr says it was 3 feet high, robust, with dark green foliage, 
very well filled, narrow, nearly straight pods and small, round, 
smooth, bluish green seeds. It stood drought well, and the pods 
and peas remained long in good condition, even on the vines. It 
was considered an excellent second-crop pea. Hogg adds that the 
stem was generally simple, sometimes branched; foliage large, pods 
paired, curved like those of Scimitar, peas 9 to 11, good-sized. 

Blue Sickle. Ref. 23. The Country Gentleman in 1862 
calls this a very dwarf, early midseason, productive variety, earlier 
and much more dwarf than Blue Scimitar. 

Carter Surprise (Ref. 24; Bliss Car. 1866) is probably a 
late strain of Blue Imperial with pods of Scimitar type, tho straighter. 
It was listed in America before 1866. 

Evergreen. Ref. 27; Thorburn Car. 1873. Laxton, about 
1871, crossed Prizetaker and Advancer to get Evergreen, which 
reached America in 1873. 

It was 5 to 6 feet tall, with rather fine, pale green foliage, and 
14 to 16 paired, rather small, slightly curved, blunt-pointed pods, 
very closely filled with 7 or 8, medium sized, bright green peas, 
shaded darker; it was in season with Scimitar, but an inferior pea. 

Sapphire. Refs. 33; Mich. Sta. Buls. 120:24. 1895, and 
131:31. 1896. Sapphire was introduced by Northrup, Braslan, 
Goodwin Co., St. Paul, Minn., in 1892; but is little known, unless 
in the middle west. The plants, peas and seeds are much like those 
of Alaska, but of semi-dwarf growth and with curved pods. As 
tested at the Michigan Station: 

Half-dwarf (introducers say 1 to 1 J 2 feet), vigorous, with large, 
rich green foliage, long curved pods rather unevenly filled, second 
early, but maturing most of pods very promptly. The peas were 
of better quality than early-maturing green sorts like Alaska, and 
the seeds are smooth and " blue." The variety was reported a 
" good producer." 

SABRE SECTION 

Blue Spanish Dwarf (Ref. 36) is a very old pea, probably 
grown in America during the first half of the nineteenth century; 
but confusion of synonyms of it and Groom Superb make it im- 
possible to say which of the two was meant in several early refer- 
ences. Hogg, 1873, makes it only a synonym of Groom Superb, 
of which the pod was very slightly, or not at all curved. It could 
never have been anything but a curiosity, at best. 

It was very dwarf, very late, short-podded but fairly prolific 
as the pods were often paired. The pods were plainly bent forward, 
or sabre-shaped. 



MINOR VARIETIES IN DIMPLED-SEEDED GROUP 



SEEDS CREAM 
Atlantie (Ref. 78) originated with Alexander before 1885. 
It had no superior merit over several other peas of its season. 

It was about 2 feet tall, with strong stems and healthy foliage, 
bearing in early midseason about 10 medium sized pods in pairs, 
containing peas of fair quality, changing to partially wrinkled, 
probably cream-colored seeds. 

^ orkshire 1 Ref. 100 1 is evidently distinct from Yorkshireman, 
Yorkshire Gem, and Yorkshire Hero. Two years' growth of it here, 
from Idaho Station seed, proved it a very good and typical member 
of this group. Vine and foliage characters were very similar to 
those of Sunrise. As with so many peas of this section, the mixed 
cream and bluish green seeds sown gave much larger crop seeds, 
quite uniformly good light green. 

Height 2 to 2 l t feet; stems stout; pods single, from 12th node, 
3 to 3 ! 4 inches long, quite broad, plump, nearly straight, with 
rounded to blunt ends; peas very large, long oval or oblong in shape, 
medium green; seeds same shape with decided indentations and 



coarse wrinkling. It matured late, 66-68 days, and gave a very 
good crop. 

Lye Favorite. Ref. 101. Jas. Lye, Market Lavington, Eng., 
originated this pea before 1892, when it won a First Class Cer- 
tificate from the Royal Horticultural Society. It was tried at 
this Station in 1926 from seed grown in the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich. 

It was a good, second early pea, 2 to 2j^ feet tall; stems 
rather heavy, unbranched, very light colored, as were the leaf- 
stalks; foliage light green, with leaflets in 4s, large, slightly glaucous 
and stipules much larger, round-tipped, glaucous, whitened; flowers 
very large, creamy or greenish white borne singly from 10th node; 
pods 3 to 3J4 inches long, broad, straight, pointed or long-rounded 
at the ends, without tips, and very poorly filled; peas 3 to 5, very 
large, round, oblong, or almost conical, rather dark green; seed very 
large, deeply and widely pitted, indented, sometimes almost wrinkled, 
light cream or almost white in color. Crop good. 

Carter International. Ref. 117. International was intro- 
duced before 1908 when it was given an Award of Merit by the Royal 



92 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Horticultural Society. It is said to be an Early Morn I Duke of 
Albany cross. When introduced its pods were considered largest 
of the curved " Marrowfat *' type. In America it is not sufficiently 
wrinkled nor good enough in quality to place it in the class of such 
peas as Alderman or Duke of Albany. 

. wrinkled seeded parents, its seeds are pitted and indented 
only, oval in shape, medium in si.'c. and usually light bluish cream in 
Height medium. 3 ' .. to 4 feet, without branches; foliage 
moderately abundant, green, somewhat whitened and with little 
14th to loth node; pods single, on long, thick, 
stalks, good deep green in color, from 3 1 i to 4 inches long, generally 
shghtk curved, quite broad, moderately plump, usually not filled 
to the edge, but filled to the end. which is long-rounded to rounded 
without a distinct tip; peas 5 to 8, large, round or indented in cross 
section and oval or oblong longitudinally. The crops at the Station 
have been produced in midseason, and poor, but in England it is 
said to bear heavily. 

This differs from Hurst International, which was given an 
Award of Merit at Wialey in lQ'ri Rov. Hort. Soc. Jour. .">2:Uix 
1927 . and is not yet known in the United States 

Kr«i«l kin:: Kit IIS was introduced by Livingston as a 
hardy selection from Gradus, earlier because it can be sown earlier, 
and with more and larger pods. It was apparently a dimpled, 
cream-seeded pea. 

I .ili-in. in Ref. 121 was introduced in 1910 by Sharpe as an 
earlier and much improved Pilot. 

As grown here it was not earlier than Pilot, but the pods were 
decidedly darker in color, rather smaller but more uniform in size, 
and much better filled, with much better colored peas. Like so 
many English peas, it was disappointing in yield, but may improve 
in this respect. In England the pods are generally paired; but were 
not in our tests; nor were the peas often more than 5 in number, 
tho one American introducer speaks of 8 or 9. 

Benefactor. Ref. 128. Holmes raised Benefactor and Hurst 
introduced it prior to 1913. It greatly resembles Welcome, a green- 
seeded dimpled pea. It was tested here for two years; and found 
a very early, very good variety of this class. 

Plants almost dwarf, 1 ! 4 to 2 feet i3'j feet in England . 
rather slender and drooping with the very good crop it produced; 
pods from 6th or 7th node, single, on moderately long, rather slender 
stalks, about 3 inches long, broad, moderately plump, straight or 
slightly curved, and well filled both to the edge and the pointed, 
tipless end; peas usually 5. large, compressed to an almost square 
cross section, oblong longitudinally, and medium green in color; 
seeds very large, oval or angular, truly " dimpled." cream to rather 
dark green in color over dark yellow under-color. 

(•hi I ogland Ref. 129 1 originated with Kelway and was 
introduced in 1913. 

As grown here, tall-vined, 4 feet, with some branches; foliage 
moderately abundant, dark green; crops good to very good; pods 
long, moderately broad and plump, straight, rather light -colored, 
with long-rounded ends and small straight tips; peas 5 to 7, large, 
round or oblong, green to dark-green: seeds medium sized, round 
to oval, dimpled, indented or somewhat wrinkled and bright cream 
in color. It was late, requiring for filled pods nearly ten weeks from 
near the middle of May. 

Earij Record. Ref. 130. Simon & Son listed this pea in 
1915 as " a selection of the rounder seeds from Gradus," that can 
be sown before Gradus, retains its earliness, and gives more and 
larger pods. It was listed by the firm for a few years; but dropped 
later, so was not tested here. 

Earlieal Springtime Refs. 131, 132 1 was introduced about 
1915. by F. W. Bolgiano as a round-seeded variety, with very long 
pods and peas as large as those of Gradus. As grown here from seed 
twice obtained from the originator it proved a variant type, the 

■ts showing differences in size, color and amount of dimpling 
of seeds, similar to those noted on our grounds between dealers' seeds 
and crop seeds of other dimpled varieties. 

Height 3 to 3' 2 feet, stem decidedly enlarged above, 
unbranched: foliage medium green, sometimes whitened, of from 

4 large leaflets and very large stipules, rounded at the tip and 

with few large teeth near the base; flowers single on long, thick stalks. 

14th node; pods 3 inches long, broad, moderately plump, 

straight, filled to the rounded end, but not to the edge; peas 5 or 

6, large, medium-green; seeds of the two strains weighed 90 and 105 

■ ounce, the larger size being accompanied, as in Station expe- 
rience with other varieties, with increased green color and roughened 
seed coat. The pods were ready before midseason; but the crops 
were not good. 



Johnson Victor (Refs. 133. 134 1 originated with W. W. 
Johnson, before 1916, when tested by the Royal Horticultural 
Society. As grown here for two seasons: 

Height 2 ' ■> to 3 feet ; pods 3 ' ■_• to 4 inches long, slightly curved, 
with long-rounded or pointed ends, of rather poor color and not 
well filled; peas large, quite irregular in shape, medium green; late 
midseason: crops only fair, not good. English descriptions make 
the seeds grayish green, but those sown here were distinctly cream, 
changing to green in the harvested seeds. 

Britisher. Ref. 137. In 1918 Kelway sent this pea for 
testing by the Royal Horticultural Society, but neither in this year 
nor in two subsequent tests did it receive special commendation. 

In our tests it was slightly shorter and more slender in vine 
than Old England, two or three days earlier, with slightly shorter 
but plumper pods, rounder ends and larger, greener peas. The 
seeds also were distinctly larger, with a very decided tendency to 
become green and more wrinkled. The crop was about the same 
as that of Old England, possibly fewer pods, but better filled. The 
pods were rarely or never paired, tho so described in English 
references. 

Morning <.l«>r\. Ref. 139. This dwarf and very early pea 
was introduced in 1920 by J. Bolgiano. As grown here: 

Height 2 feet or less: stem slender and drooping, unbranched; 
foliage moderate in amount, light green, often decidedly whitened, 
but with little bloom, with large leaflets in 2s or 4s, and very large 
round-tipped stipules; flowers single, from the 8th node; pods 2 ' j to 
3 inches long, broad, moderately plump, straight, long-pointed, 
light colored and poorly filled; peas 3 to 5, very large, round to oval, 
medium to dark green in color. When sown May 22, in a hot, dry 
season, pods were ready to pick in 6 weeks, but the crop was poor. 

Under moister and cooler conditions when the pods could 
lengthen and fill, this should be a good, early, market pea. 

\\ arrior. Warrior came originally from Kelway who intro- 
duced it before 1920. It is much like Telegraph, but with cream- 
colored seeds. It was grown here for two seasons, from seed sent 
by the Idaho Station in 1922: 

Stems tall, 5 feet, slender, unbranched; foliage abundant, 
light green, slightly whitened, with small leaflets in 6s and somewhat 
larger stipules; pods single, from 13th node, extra long, broad to 
medium, moderately plump, straight or slightly curved, with pointed 
or long-rounded ends, not well filled; but when good, they contained 
6 to 8 or more large, oval peas of medium green color; seeds of medium 
size, mostly bright cream in color, round, but much indented, 
dimpled and wrinkled. 

Klondike Refs. 144; letter Buist, Dec. 15, 1926> was 
introduced by Buist about 1916, the stock coming from a farmer 
who had grown it for many years. It many respects it resembles 
the old variety, William the First, and may be derived from it. It 
is unlike the more recently introduced dimpled peas, seeming to be 
fixed in seed-type without the tendency to vary which marks so 
many others of the group. It was grown here for three seasons. 

More dwarf than William the First, 2 l 2 feet; stems slender, 
sometimes branched; foliage medium in density and medium green 
in color, with small leaflets in 4s and very large stipules rounded at 
the tip, both leaflets and stipules decidedly whitened and somewhat 
glaucous; pods usually under 3'j inches in length, sometimes quite 
short, moderately broad and plump giving a round-oval cross-sec- 
tion, straight or slightly curved, pointed at the end, usually filled 
to the edge but not to the tip; peas 5 or 6, very large, round or 
indented, oblong, dark green: seeds medium to large, cream, much 
indented, sometimes almost square and widely pitted or almost 
wrinkled. The pods were ready in early midseason and the crops 
good. 

Johnson Glory Ref. 1 34 1 was sent to Wisley for trial in 1922 
and said to have been introduced by W. W. Johnson. 

It has been grown at the Station for three seasons, from seed 
sent by the Idaho Station. 

It seems very similar to the old Glory 'Gilson's!, rather shorter 
in vine, darker of foliage, slightly longer podded, with larger peas 
and slightly larger seeds. Though sown at different dates it appears 
to be of the same season as the older variety, a second or third early. 
It gave fair to good crops. 

SEEDS GREEN 
Tall Green Marrow Refs. 1 5 is distinct from the Tall 
Green Wrinkled Marrow bred and segregated by Knight. Knight's 
Marrows were all truly wrinkled peas, but this had only compressed 
and very slightly wrinkled seeds, probably close to our dimpled peas. 
It was described, with numerous synonyms, in 1834, and again at 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



93 



various intervals until 1865 when it was said to be disappearing. 
It probably never reached America. 

Very tall. 7 feet, of strong growth; pods large: broad, rather 
flat, dark green; peas 8 or 9 large, green; seeds yellowish green. It 
was prolific but late. 

Improved Green Marrow Ref. 6*. advertised by Fames 
in 1842, may have come from either the preceding or the following 
variety. 

The height. 4 feet, is the only characteristic given. 

Early Green Marrow. Refs. 7; Jour. Hort. 1:29. 1861. 
U. S. Pat. Off. Rpf. Agr. 1865. As described in 1834, this 
" early " pea. sown near the last of March, required nearly four 
months to mature: so differed but little in that respect from Tall 
Green Marrow. It was listed in the United States in 1865. 

Shorter vined, only 4 feet, and bore paired pods, which, however, 
were shorter, plumper, and better filled, as well as slightly curved. 
The seeds were mixed cream and green. In 1860, it was found to 
be taller, 7 feet, and much like Prizetaker, a newer variety, with 
smaller pods and " in every respect inferior." 

Bellamy Early Green Marrow. Refs. 13-17; Hogg Gard, 
Yk. Bk. 11:83. 1873. An early Green Marrow, with dark 
glossy pods, evidently not the same as the peas of that name 
previously described, was advertised by Frederick Warner in 
1846 and mentioned again in 1847 as Green Wrinkled Marrow. 
This was followed by Bellamy Early Green Marrow, advertised by 
Sutton in 1849, which probably was an improvement on one or the 
other of the two early Green Marrows, and possibly related to the 
old Matchless Marrowfat. It seems to have been the ancestor or 
predecessor of Prizetaker and Rising Sun, and was, on their advent, 
considered inferior to them. Hogg gives the name only as a synonym 
of Prizetaker. 

Height about 5 feet; much earlier than the tall marrows 
previously known; with long, narrow, slightly curved pods, quite 
distinct from earlier types, containing 7-8 large, compressed peas, 
which were of decidedly improved quality. It may have been a 
truly wrinkled variety, but the synonymy would imply only dimpled 
seeds, white and olive green. 

Large Green Normandy (Refs. 25, 26) was tested and 
described at this Station in 1884. It is an old French variety grown 
to some extent in England, and said to be allied to Tall Green 
Mammoth. The early Station description makes it much like the 
early marrows: 

Height about 5 feet: stem strong: foliage deep green; pods often 
paired, short, plump, slightly curved, round ended and occasionally 
constricted between the peas (lomentlike< so that the latter were 
much flattened, tho large; seeds very large, oblong and somewhat 
indented, bluish white or creamy white in color. It was very late 
and moderately productive. 

Denver Prolific Green Marrow. Refs. 34, 35: Hogg Gard. 
Yr. Bk. 11:85. 1873. This variety is synonymous with others 
essential in the history of the type. It was probably a temporarily 
better strain of Tall Green Marrow, developed by Wm. Battle, Sus- 
sex, Eng., about 1855, more prolific than the parent strain, possibly 
a few days earlier and with peas of better color. It lasted only ten 
years or so. Hogg makes it synonymous with Garbutt Amazon. 

Rising Sun. Refs. 36, 37; Country Gent. 18:174. 1861; 
Thorbum Car. 1876; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:72. 1873. Rising 
Sun, advertised in 1856 by Flanagan, was only 3 feet high, early, 
and with dark green pods; but was probably only a good strain of 
Bellamy Early Green Marrow. It was listed by American seedsmen 
from 1861 to 1876. According to Hogg, Rising Sun was a synonym 
of Early Emperor, cream-seeded. 

Garbutt Amazon iRefs. 38, 39; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:85. 
1873) was, like the last, a Flanagan pea, appearing in 1857, and 
possibly earlier than similar varieties. It was a strong, robust 
grower 5 to 6 feet tall, unbranched. The irregular seeds were cream 
and olive. Tho well known in England, it apparently never reached 
America. 

Leicester Defiance (Ref. 42), probably introduced by Harri- 
scn 2), was considered in 1861 merely a synonym of Beck Prize- 
taker. It was still listed by the introducers in 1887. The name 
was known in America only as a synonym. 

Berkshire Hero. Refs. 43, 44. Sutton, in 1859 gave William 
Culverwell, Taunton, as originator of Berkshire Hero, thus intro- 



ducing a commercial breeder who contributed very many varieties 
to England's long list of peas, but who was comparatively unknown 
outside a narrow circle. No American references to the variety 
were found. 

It was " like Tall Mammoth in growth, British Queen in seed." 
It was taller, if anything, than Tall Mammoth, late, with very large 
pods, containing 7 -9 large peas or large, slightly indented I British 
Queen's seeds were truly wrinkled I grayish olive or yellowish white 
seeds. 

Competitor (Refs. 45H7) was introduced about the same 
time as Berkshire Hero: and may have been identical with it; as 
several descriptions are the same and it is made a synonym of the 
same varieties. Hogg, 1873, considers it the same as Tall Green 
Mammoth. The Horticultural Society descriptions, however, make 
Competitor earlier than Berkshire Hero, shorter-vined, with fewer 
pods which contain fewer peas and are straight and cylindrical 
instead of long and slightly curved. Competitor was listed in 
America in 1861. This pea described under this name in Denaiffe's 
Les Pois Potagers with the synonym Surprise, is much closer to 
Eight Weeks than to Competitor. 

Noble Early Green Marrow (Ref. 48 1 is described by Burr, 
altho it may not have been grown in the United States. It was a 
sub-variety of Bellamy's pea of the same name, and a much more 
abundant bearer of very uniform pods. 

Royal Blue. Ref. 49. Harrison 1 1 ) originated Royal Blue 
and distributed it in 1864, mainly because of its curious appear- 
ance, lack of bloom giving stems, stipules and pods a peculiar green 
color. It was 3 feet tall, with pods and peas typical of the group, 
a. poor producer of peas of inferior quality. 

Challenger. Refs. 71, 72; Gregory Cat. 1878. Carter's own 
Telegraph-like pea. Challenger, was advertised side by side with 
that variety; but seems never to have acquired wide distribution or 
popularity. Its origin is unknown. It was offered in England 
and America simultaneously: but we find no record of its actual 
growth here except in the test by Prof. Goff in 1884. 

Spoken of as dwarf in England, here it grew as tall as Tele- 
graph, had a very' large angular stem branched at the base only, 
pale, yellowish green foliage almost bloomless and somewhat 
whitened, pods very similar to those of Telegraph, but more taper- 
ing, lighter in color, with about one less pea to the pod and these of 
rather poor color. It was only moderately productive, rather late 
and matured slowly. 

Gladiator (Refs. 77: Henderson Cat. 1892 1 is probably a 
Laxton pea. It received a First Class Certificate from the Royal 
Horticultural Society in 1882 and was advertised by Veitch (1) in 
1883. It reached America in 1892, but has never been widely grown. 
It is an improvement on Fillbasket and more dwarf, bearing a very 
good crop in midseason. 

Height seldom over 2 feet; pods long, moderately plump, 
slightly curved, smooth, good green, pointed or rounded at the ends, 
well filled; peas 6 or 7, medium sized, oval to oblong, light to medium 
green. 

Renilworth (Refs. 81, 82; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:5. 1904), 
one of the parents of Early Bird, is said to be similar to William the 
First, late, taller than Advancer, a good bearer, but not of as good 
quality. It was grown for a test in South Dakota, but seems, 
otherwise, to be unknown in America. 

Green Noyon (Refs. 83; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:259. 1885) 
is probably of Blue Prussian habit. According to Hogg, it might 
better be placed in the Alaska group, as he says the peas were small, 
round, smooth and light green. 

As tested here in 1884. was 2 1 jj feet tall, branched, stocky- 
stemmed; with deep green foliage: very productive but very late; 
pods short, narrow, very plump, light green, with rounded ends; 
peas oblong or compressed, whitish green; seeds dull pale green or 
bluish, with some cream or almost white, all slightly oblong and 
shallowly dimpled. 

Dwarf Green St. Michael (Ref. 84 i is known only thru a 
test at this Station in 1884. 

It differed from Green Noyon in being shorter in vine, with 
shorter pods, and fewer peas, slightly earlier and maturing promptly, 
but less productive. 

Early William (Ref. 93), introduced about 1886, was credited 
to Laxton, and said to be " an early, dwarf William the First." 



94 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



As grown here from French seed, it differed only a littli 
the older variety, altho the seeds were more definitely green 1 
r-vined, nor were th 
im the Fil mis hard to keep true to type. 

Imperial Blue. Reft 20, 21, in Alaska Group, and 94 in 

this group. Imperial Dwarf Blue is mentioned in connection with 

Blue Imperial: but seeds of the former variety from the Idaho 

■\ were very different from those of Blur Imperial. In our 

: rial, from the - . . corresponds much in n 

ia of Green Prussian, and Imperial Blue to the 

Blue Imperial, which is generally Hud to have large. 

The name Imperial Blue appeared in 

Amn . 1864 as that of a Canadian field pea. and the \ 

ck feeding. It has greenish Bowers, indi 
descent from Blue Prussian. 
Plan- rial Blue arc of typical dimpled pea type: stems 

-rt. unbranche.l. foliage abundant, d.irk green, with 
ts in t>s. rather than in 4s. large and whitened and the stipules 
pain, begin high on the stem. 19th node, on 
. i v. Pilot and Leader type: peas few. 
averaging 4. an 1 large, broadly oval or oblong, flattened, and of 
medium green color; seeds above medium in size, oblong in shape. 
vith large shallow pits, or dimples, and light, 
bluish green in color. The crop was very late and the pods ripened 
. .vim; a very good yield. Tho not tested, the peas should 
be of fair quality. 

M ij Queen Kef. 103 . first listed by Moore & Simon about 
1901. veil enough described to identify it. It is possible 

that this is Sutton May Queen, placed in the Gem group. 

As grown here it is undistinguishable from Claudit in the field, 
except that it flowers I >wer on the stem. 8th instead of 12th node, 
has very slightly longer pods, and fewer peas, making these somewhat 
larger. The seeds vary a little more in color and are perhaps more 
wrinkled. Season and crop production appear the same. 

Dwarf Green Wrinkled Marrow. Ref. 104. This exceed- 
ingly dwarf dimpled pea has been listed by Griffith & Turner since 
about 1901. 

As grown here: Less than 1 foot tall: stem stout, sparingly 
branched at the base: foliage abundant, dark green, with large 
leaflets, slightly whitened, often only in pairs, and somewhat larger, 
considerably whitened stipules with sharp tips and very fine sharp 
teeth almost from base to tip; flowers single, on short, thick stalks, 

-■th node: pods usually more than 3 inches long, rather broad, 

-ately plump, slightly curved and ending in long points without 
distinct tips; peas 5 or 6. very large, oval to oblong, dark green; 
seeds of average sire, oval or oblong, indented and somewhat broadly 
pitted or dimpled, occasionally wrinkled, cream and light grayish 
green in color. Pods are ready in early midseason; but the crop 
is only fair. 

-Miiiri-i- Blue Ref. 114 was sent to France by Carter and 
may have come to America; but has never been widely grown, even 
in England. It is quite dwarf, with rather short, straight pods, and 
distinctly dimpled seeds. It is called early but probably only 
because it can be sown early: since it required 120 days to mature. 

W lerful K\ir.i Earl) Ref. US . later Wonderful, was 

introduced to a few growers in 1906 and regularly in 1908 by Schultz. 
is described as a dimpled pea like Pride of the Market, 
with slightly curved pods having rounded tips. 

As grown here it was decidedly early, rather tall, and branched; 
bore its cream-colored flowers high 12th node and above) singly 
and in pairs, on long stalks: and produced long 2 ( 4 to 3' , inches 
nearly straight, blunt to square-ended pods, with very small tips. 
The peas 5 to 8 in a pod were of medium size, round and whitish 
greer, md the medium sized seeds were sometimes distinctly 

dimpled and colored as noted above. 

It may be the same as Schell's Wonderful, described elsewhere 

■ . but seeds are smaller, hardly as much dimpled nor as green. 

Grand Monarch. Refs. 116: letter from Forbes. This pea, 
sent out as new by Noll about 1907 and carried by this firm and 
.ccesaor for many years, was discontinued because considered 
idcrr sex I • is still listed by at least one other American 

seedsman and was grown here for two years before its similarity to 
Acquisition and Ameer was noted. 

V . .111:11. ml Refs. 122: Rice Caf. 1922 , " a blue-seeded Pilot," 
was offered in 1910 by Sharpe. In 1922 seed of it was received 
her-- • ,s also cataloged about the same time by a 

seedsman. 



It is of medium height, rather early and a fairly productive 
variety with long, but rather poorly filled pods medium green peas 
and distinctly wrinkled, gray green seeds. 

Another Vanguard will be found among Wrinkled, Cream- 
at e ded peas. 

Twentieth Centur) Giant. Ref 123. Tinsley listed this 

novelty" in 1911, originated "by most careful expert work of 

•11 for a number of years." It was of the Ameer or Claudit 

type, nearly a week later than Alaska, with long, round-ended pods, 

broadest one third of the way from the tip. 

Earl} Marvel Reft. 126> was announced in 1913 by Weeber 
as a " valuable introduction, first and best of all round-seeded varie- 
ties." and said to have pods of Gradus type, often paired, and with 
deep green peas. The seeds wt re pi ibably dimpled. 

Eldorado Ref. 1271 is a dwarf, dimpled -seeded pea with 
large, dark-green, pointed pods, like those of Pilot but with green 
seeds. It originated with Sharpe about 1913, and reached America 
about six years later. It was discarded by at least two seedsmen 
about 1923 as inferior to Acquisition and other peas of its type 

Was grown lure in 1926 from seed raised at McMillan. Mich . 
less than a foot tall, with widely varying pods, often short, but broad, 
long rounded at the ends, with 4 to 6 large peas. 

Despatch Refs. 135, 136 1 was offered by Burpee in 1917. 

It is perhaps more a pitted than a dimpled -seeded variety, 
but the large, straight, pointed to long-rounded pods and large 
size of peas and seeds and the deep pitting and slight dimpling of 
the latter remove it from the Alaska group. As grown here it was 
about 2 feet tall, with rather light-colored foliage, single-podded 
from about 6th to 8th node, almost as early as Alaska in season, 
but not specially productive. 

Councillor Ref. 142 was announced as new in Kelway's 
1922 catalog, but must have originated earlier, as seed of it was 
received here in that year from the Idaho Station. 

It was dwarf, with compact, bushy plants having a somewhat 
peculiar appearance due to the closely set leaflets in 6s, and the 
prominent tendrils; pods usually paired, not large, 2's to 3 ' 4 inches, 
neither specially broad nor specially plump, very slightly curved, 
with long-rounded, tipless ends; peas 6 to 10, medium sized, indented, 
sometimes almost short-cylindrical, of medium color: seeds small, 
168 to the ounce, short -cylindrical in shape, indented, and slightly 
dimpled, greenish cream and light cream in color. The pods 
matured in midseason, but the crops were not specially good. 

Tiptop. Ref. 143. This was listed in 1922 by Kelway, 
but as tried at Wisley in 1925, it was credited to Cullen. It was 
given an Award of Merit. Seed of it came to us from the Idaho 
Station. Satisfactory descriptions of the plants and pods were not 
secured, but pods were ready in 52 and 57 days respectively, from 
moderately late and moderately early seedings. In U. S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture tests in 1928 it was the earliest pea noted. 

As studied and described at McMillan, Mich., in 1925. 
in U. S. Department of Agriculture plats: Height 2 to 2'.j feet, 
slender-stemmed; foliage sparse, light-green, of small, broadly 
oblong, slightly whitened or yellowed leaflets in 4s, and slightly 
larger, much whitened stipules; flowers above 9th node; pods single, 
3 inches long, on medium long, slender but rigid stalks, fairly 
broad, straight, with very long rounded ends, the dorsum having a 
distinct long notch near the tip; peas 6, crowded; seeds almost 
round, smooth to semi-smooth, with a few deep pits, and light green 
in color. Very early, but crop data not secured. 

Welcome Ref. 146 1 was developed by Hurst for Continental 
trade, where the smoother peas arc in demand; but this variety and 
Ajax, grown for the same purpose, attracted so much attention in the 
trial grounds because of their large crops that both were included in 
the English edition of the Hurst catalog of 1923. Welcome was 
called an early William the Conqueror, the latter being an improved 
William the First. 

As grown at this Station, it was 2' 4 to 2'^ feet tall (half 
its height in England ; pods only 2'| to 3 inches long, narrow but 
plump, slightly curved, with pointed to slightly rounded ends, 
dark green, well filled; peas 5 7. rather large, indented or almost 
square, oval, very well colored; seeds light green, of almost the 
same shape as the peas, but much smaller, heavily pitted or almost 
wrinkled. Very early for a dimpled pea; very productive. 

Mammoth Kvira Early (Ref. 147 1. entirely distinct from 
Mammoth-podded Extra Early, was cataloged in 1922, perhaps 
earlier, by Alneer. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



95 



Height 4' 2 feet: stem slender, sometimes branched at the 
base foliage dense, medium to dark green, with 5-6 small leaflets 
and stipules not much larger, both scarcely whitened flowers large, 
in pairs from the 8th to the 10th node' pods paired, intermediate 
in size between those of Alaska and those typical of the dimpled 
seeded group, with pointed to round ends fairly well filled' peas 
4 5j medium sized, oval, somewhat indented and medium green 
in color: seeds, like the pods, intermediate in type, and green in 
color. It is an early midseason variety producing only fair crops. 

\iav Ref. 151 I, like Welcome, was developed by Hurst for 
Continental trade, and listed in the firm's English catalog for 1923 
because of its profuse podding. It is decidedly later than Welcome, 
a better cropper for the size of the plants, and can be grown in closely 
spaced rows. 

Very dwarf, less than a foot tall as grown here ( 1 } 2 feet in 
England . with rather better pods than Welcome, curved at the 
point, much darker in color, and as well, if not better filled with 
peas, which are more oblong and also better colored. 

Ilartncr Early Market iRef. 152i was listed by the Western 
Seed Co. in 1923 as a very early medium height variety, with typi- 
cally dimpled seeds: but according to letters from the introducers, 
it is only Pilot, renamed; and Hartner Miracle, a pea from the same 
company, grown for some years in the San Luis Valley, Colo., and 
tested at McMillan, Mich , is also closely related to Pilot. 



Jubilant. Ref. 153. Henderson introduced Jubilant in 
1925; so it is hardly old enough to have had fair testing. In our 
plats, however, it has not done well, failing to produce many pods. 

It is not striking in any of its plant characteristics, but starts 
flo%vering low on the stem and the pods are large, 3 '4 to 3 :i 4 inches 
long, medium in breadth, plump, straight, pointed or rounded at 
the end. well filled with 5 or 6 very large peas and of fairly good 
color. The seeds are of moderate size, round or oval, not often 
compressed but well dimpled. 

VSonder of Holland was noted in the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich., in 1925 and was grown here 
in 1926 from seed secured there. 

Nothing of its history has been learned, but it seems a very 
distinct variety. 

Seeds small, not larger than those of Alaska, but deeply and 
closely pitted, compressed and indented lengthwise of the pod, 
and sometimes also dimpled, approaching Horal and Rogers Winner 
in appearance, and distinctly bluish green in color, occasionally 
cream: very dwarf, 1 foot at Geneva; foliage dense, very dark green, 
not whitened either on the small leaflets or much larger stipules- 
flowers low; pods paired, 3's to 3 5 y inches long, narrow but very 
plump, rounded at the end and with distinct large tip: peas average 
5, small, oval and indented, and medium green in color, not of 
very good quality. It is an early midseason variety, yielding well. 



MINOR VARIETIES IN WRINKLED, CREAM SEEDED GROUP 



VERY DWARF PLANTS 

Mighty Atom (Ref. 3 . " raised " by Dicks, was tested by 
the Royal Horticultural Society in 1921, and later listed by at least 
two English seedsmen. It was grown here and in the U. S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich., in 1924 and 1925, 
but is probably not yet sold in this country. It is decidedly better 
than Minimum. 

Very early, somewhat taller than Minimum, darker in color 
both of foliage and pods, and producing many straight, pointed to 
long-rounded pods containing about 8 very large, closely packed, 
bright green peas of good, but not the best, quality. The seeds are 
sometimes more dimpled than wrinkled. 

Perfect Early. Refs. 6; letter from Isbell, Jan. 27, 1927. 
Isbell introduced Perfect Early in 1914 and still lists it; but it is not 
generally cataloged. It was based on several plants selected from 
Nott Excelsior as having much larger pods. 

As grown here it is almost as dwarf as Harbinger, a day or 
two later, not quite as good a cropper, but with decidedly longer, 
" stocky " pods, rather better colored and with larger peas of not 
quite as good quality. The rather larger seeds never show green 
as do those of the parent variety. 

Acacia. Seed of this peculiar little pea came from the U. S. 
Department of Agriculture plats. It was used by White in breeding 
work at the Brooklyn Botanical Garden in 1917, three strains of it 
having been secured from Bateson of England and Vilmorin of 
France Our systematist believes it is a reversion to a very early 
type, as it is distinct from all other varieties known to us in having 
no tendrils but with leaflets replacing the tendrils, so that all leaves 
above one or two at the base consist of 4 full pairs and a terminal 
leaflet, very small, closely set and medium green in color. 

Height seldom exceeds a foot; pods, usually single, from 3rd 
node up, on long, slender stalks, usually 2' 2 to 2 7 s inches long, 
occasionally straight or slightly curved at the tip, plump, blunt or 
square-ended, with a rather large tip, well filled; peas averaging 
more than 5, medium-sized, medium green, which color is held or 
even deepened in cooking, not sweet, but only poor to fair in qual- 
ity; seeds well wrinkled. It is a midseason pea, giving very good 
crops for such small plants. 

DWARF PLANTS 

White Gem. Refs. 9, 10; Rural N. Y. 25:69. 1872; Vick 
Cat. 1875. White Gem, or Nutting No. 1, was introduced by Car- 
ter about 1870, and soon reached America. It was very little 
grown here, as it was found in but one American catalog, and there 
under the synonym. 

American references say it was only 4 days later than the 
earliest varieties of the time; height lj^ to 1}4 feet; pods large, 
plump, slightly curved, round or blunt-ended; peas of medium 
quality; very productive. Hogg adds that it was robust and vig- 
orous, with pale green, whitened foliage and paired pods borne low 



on the stem, containing 6 or 7 large, whitish green peas, or large, 
white, wrinkled seeds 

Earliest Table Marrow. Ref. 11. Seed of this variety, 
listed as new by Rennie in 1917, was received at the Station from the 
University of British Columbia. It was very early and gave very 
good crops. 

Good dwarf variety, height IJ2 to 1 3 4 feet; pods medium 
length, straight, square- or protuberant -ended, plump, light green, 
well filled; peas large, light to medium green, of fine quality; seeds 
very attractive, bright cream, finely wrinkled. 

Germania. Ref. 12. Thorburn includes Germania among 
novelties in 1909 but does not give its origin. It was not found in 
recent United States catalogs, but seed of it was received from the 
University of British Columbia. It is one of the earliest wrinkled- 
seeded peas. 

Taller than Harbinger, 2 feet; pods light green, averaging 
longer but not as well filled; peas large; seeds beautifully wrinkled, 
but varied markedly in color, those sown being all clear cream 
without green and those harvested light, dull green with rarely one 
showing a cream tint Crops not quite equal those of Harbinger. 

Vanguard. Refs. 13; Amer. Agr. 33:103. 1874. Nelson's 
Vanguard, from Sutton, was grown by the Royal Horticultural 
Society in 1867, but received no award; and in other English trials 
was ranked as very good but not among the best. It was noticed in 
America in 1874, but was evidently little grown. 

It was described as a white, wrinkled marrow, 1 \ 2 feet tall, 
earlier than Alliance, which is called third early, prolific, but with 
small, poorly filled pods. It is not at all like another Vanguard, a 
green-seeded, dimpled pea. 

Nabob. Refs. 17; Country Cent. 38:278. 1873; Hogg 
Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:77. 1873. Nabob was a Laxton pea, originating 
prior to 1872 as a Little Gem x Prolific Long-pod cross. The original 
description was reprinted in America, but Nabob may not have 
been grown here. It was said to be the " largest and best early 
dwarf white-seeded variety." 

Plants 1 J 2 to 2 feet tall, strong, robust: foliage heavy, dark 
green; pods long, curved, shorter necked and rounder ended than 
those of Auvergne, deep green in color; peas 7-9, medium-sized, 
pale green. Hogg says it was very productive. 

Referendum Ref. 18 1 was called new in 1919 by Kelway 
and probably has been grown in this country only at this Station 
and on the U. S. Department of Agriculture test plats. It was not 
quite uniform as grown here, and plainly was not acclimated as 
some of the plants lacked vigor; but otherwise it was an excellent 
dwarf variety. 

Much like Chelsea Gem, about as tall, with less abundant and 
lighter colored foliage, a day or two earlier; pods of similar shape, 
slightly longer, rather lighter in color, very plump, with pointed 
ends; with more and larger peas; seeds somewhat less wrinkled. 
The first crops were not quite as good as those of Chelsea Gem, but 



96 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



with acclimated stock should be better, as the variety is said to be 
extraordinarily prolific in England. 

Vlloliiiint Holder Ref. 1 S* is quite similar to Referendum, 
and was listed by Kelway at the same time, 1919. Allotment 
Holder seemed more uniform in type, of good vigor and gave good 

ry g,s>d crops. This may be an old variety renamed. 
It is slightly more dwarf than Referendum, a day or so earlier, 
with vines lomewhal the Daisy type, rather " bunchy 

at top through si "a unfolding of upper leaves, with rather more 
abundant foliage. pods decidedly longer. .! ' j to -1 inches, straight. 

. only moderately plump, not as well filled, with similar point I 
cmls. the dorsum also often sloping to the tip, not s. i attractive, tho 
longer and broader; )>cas 3 to 8. large, medium to dark green, more 

B oval or oblong and frequently indented: seeds not quite as 
large as those of Referendum but equally wrinkled. 

Melting Marrow Ref. 27 was brought to America by 
Henderson in 1905 as " one of the best of the recent English intro- 
ductions; " but was not found in English pea lists. American 
seedsmen, who have handled both, consider it practically indistin- 
guishable from some of the varying strains of Sutton Excelsior. 

Seeds, from British Columbia, and the crop seeds from them, 
were cream with only slight admixture of green mot as marked as 
in most strains Excelsior ; pods straight, those of Sutton 

Excelsior slightly curved; so the variety is treated as distinct and 
mentioned here. It gave good to very good crops, ready with New 
Era. but pods were by no means as well filled as those of that 
variety. 

Earl) Giant. Refs. 30; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:5. 1904. Sut- 
ton's Early Giant, introduced in 1896, was above medium height 
in England; but in America, particularly at this Station, was dwarf, 
seldom reaching 2 feet in height here, 2 ' ■> to 3 feet elsewhere. 

Flowers from 7th or 8th node up, on long, slender stalks; pods 
3 ' » to 3 ' 2 inches, broad, not very plump, straight, very long pointed, 
often with dorsum also sloping, and poorly filled; peas few, 2 to 
4, very large, oval oblong and light colored, as were the pods. The 
small percentage of peas to pods and moderate crops, not better 
than good, condemn the variety for America, altho it is reported 
as doing somewhat better in other tests. It was second early. 

-hi t".n Seedling. Refs. 31; S. Dak. Sta. Buls. i\7>:5. 1904; 
and 91:8. 1905. Culverwell originated this pea, introduced by 
Sutton in 1895. It was grown at the South Dakota Station in 1903 
and 1904 and at this Station recently. It was neither quite as 
early nor quite as dwarf as described by Sutton, but would be called 
a dwarf second early. 

Pods 3 to 4 inches long, very slightly curved, with long-rounded 
ends carrying small tips, poorly filled, and light, bright green; 
peas large, light green: seeds large, oblong oval, flattened, rather 
dull cream. The crops were poor. 

Crown Prime Ref. 42 originated in England with one of 
that country's unnamed " famous hybridizers." and after wide- 
spread trial in 1893, was introduced in 1896 by Johnson & Stokes. 
It was said to be very dwarf, but at the New Jersey Station in 1898 
was 2 ' 2 feet tall, medium late, with pods 4 inches long and very 
broad. Of 30 varieties, it gave the best yield of pods, but these 
filled poorly. The very favorable reports received from the intro- 
ducers' trial packets seemed to warrant the claim that Crown 
Prince usually gave 7 to 8 peas to the pod and " eclipsed Stratagem, 
Telephone and others of its class in both quality and productiveness." 
The blossoms were largely toward the top of the plants. A French 
authority calls it an American pea, so the entire stock was probably 
sent to this country; and says it resembled Eugenie, cream-seeded. 
This explains its inclusion in this group. Perhaps it might better 
be placed in the Large-podded Dwarf group. 

White Prolific Marrow. Refs. 43; Gregory Car. 1890. 
This pea was introduced in 1884 by Sharpe and reached the United 
States in 1890; but has never been extensively grown here. 

j feet tall, with an abundance of long, straight, 
paired pods, well filled, ready in late midseason. Seeds were 
wrinkled. 

t Market. Ref. 44. Vaughan introduced Sweet Mar- 
ket in 1900, and it is probably an American pea. It is called second 
early, but with us, at McMillan, Mich., and in South Dakota, it 
was not ready until late midseason or after. 

Height often 2J£. feet, but in the dwarf class, the stout stems, 
rarely branched, holding the plants quiet erect: foliage abundant, 
dark green: pods often paired, from 11th node, or higher on tall 



vines, 3' ; j to 3 s ., inches long, quite broad, plump, straight or slightly 
curved, blunt ended without distinct tips, of good green color, not 
specially well filled; peas average about 5, very large, light green, 
oval, oblong and compressed, of better than good quality, tho 
hardly very good; seeds very large, quite irregular and well wrinkled. 
The crops have not been especially good, poor filling of the pods 
counterbalancing their pairing. 

MEDIUM HEIGHT PLANTS 

\ i«-k First Choice Ref. 45) was listed, without special notice, 
in the 1920 Vick catalog, was overlooked and not tested here. This 
is probably not the First Choice of Livingston, a dwarf. Stratagem- 
like pea. 

The introducers claim it is very early semi-dwarf i3 to 3 1 ■> feet 
tall . very prolific, with large, rich, dark green pods, containing 7 
or 8 peas " having all the delicious sweetness of Gradus." The 
seeds are white and wrinkled. 

Wonder Worker. Ref. 46. J. Bolgiano lists Wonder 
Worker sometimes Workcrsi in his catalog of 1906, and the variety 
from this seed has been grown at the Station for three seasons, while 
seed also came to us from British Columbia under the name Bol- 
giano's Wonder. This is apparently the same variety, like it in 
most points, altho the seeds were fully one-half larger and the crop 
10 days later. Neither the Baltimore nor the Washington Bolgiano 
firm lists a Wonder. 

Height 2 1 2 to 3 feet, foliage of Alaska-type, occasionally 
with a basal branch; flowers from 9th node; pods occasionally paired, 
of Thomas Laxton type, 2 7 s to 3 ' , inches long, better developed 
and plumper, more uniform, but slightly lighter in color, with a 
beautiful bloom; peas average about 5 to the pod, not of very good 
color, quality probably not as good; seeds smaller and usually 
without the green that shows in Laxton. Crops good, only. 

McLean Wonderful. Refs. 47; Vick Car. 1869; Hogg 
Card. Yr. Bk. 11:99. 1873. This Wonderful originated before 
1860 with Dr. McLean, one of England's early and most productive 
pea breeders, from a cross of Beck Gem with one of the best wrinkled 
marrowfats. Turner introduced Wonderful and Dr. McLean's 
Little Gem at the same time. It came to America quite promptly, 
following Little Gem by three or four years, but was never as popular 
as that variety. It was held to be the same as Princess, Prince of 
Wales, and Yorkshire Hero, but the latter two varieties, at least, 
now differ somewhat from the description of Wonderful. 

It was second early, almost midseason, three feet tall, branch- 
ing, heavily podded from low on the stem; pods large, 2}£ to 3j^ 
inches, slightly curved, often poorly filled but at their best with 7 
or 9 large peas of excellent quality; seeds white, wrinkled. Hogg 
says plant similar to Alliance, more even and regular, not so succu- 
lent, two days later and much superior to it. 

Prolific. Ref. 52-57. At least five different "Prolific" 
peas of the wrinkled or marrowfat type have been grown in the 
United States, of which the descriptions are so incomplete and the 
dates so overlapping that it is impossible to separate them definitely 
or to be certain to which to assign the Prolific Marrowfat grown in 
Station tests, especially as this shows some green seeds, while 
descriptions of the varieties known to have come to America are all 
classed as white-seeded. This difference might easily be due to 
the change in seed color of peas grown under different conditions. 
From its similarity to Dr. McLean, of which Sutton Prolific Marrow- 
fat is said to be an improvement, our Prolific Marrowfat, from seeds 
received from British Columbia, is probably Sutton's, with some- 
what more green in the seeds. 

Height about 2 to 2}^ feet; foliage rather large, moderately 
dark . pods from 1 5th node, 3 ' 4 to 4 ' £ inches long, broad, moderately 
plump, straight but somewhat irregular, thick-walled, with long 
rounded ends, moderately deep green in color; peas from 5 to 7, 
fairly large, almost round and of good color; seeds round oval, much 
flattened and indented, moderately wrinkled, of very good quality. 
Crops in midseason, only fair. 

Lynn Wrinkled Marrow. Refs. 51-53; Country Cent. 
20:79. 1862; Hogg Card. Yr. Bk. 11:100. 1873. This pea may 
be really a Black-eyed Marrowfat, but the wrinkled seeds place 
it here. It was known in England before 1855 and in America in 
1862. It was said to be very productive and to resist drouth well; 
but Hogg calls it an inferior variety. In this country it seemed very 
early, but English data make it a midseason variety. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



97 



Height 3' 2 to 4 feet, with small, cylindrical, nearly straight 
pods, with 6 to 8 small peas so crowded in the pods as to be flat 
on the ends, like sections of a cylinder. The dry peas were depressed 
on the ends, wrinkled, white but with a black spot on the hilum. 

McLean Prolific. Refs. 54; Evans Cat. 1868; Hogg Gard. 
Yr. Bk. 11:99. 1873. McLean Prolific was introduced by Turner 
in 1860 and was listed in the United States in 1868. It was similar 
to Knight's White Marrows. Hogg said it resembles Wonderful 
i McLean i but has much larger pods (cuts show them half longer), 
broad, slightly curved and blunt-pointed; and is two days later, 
keeping long in good condition. 

Height 2'j to 3 feet, unbranched, with dark green foliage, 
much blotched with white, with pods generally paired, and con- 
taining 5 or 6 well-developed peas; medium early. 

James Prolific V> rinkled Marrow. Refs. 55; Rural N. Y. 
33:108. 1874: Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:99. 1873. Out of 200 
varieties tested this was one of 12 to receive a First Class Certificate 
from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1873, and seems to have 
been known in the United States in the next year. 

It was 3 feet tall, bore fine, large pods containing 6-9 peas 
which were white and wrinkled when ripe. Hogg's figure shows 
very heavy, long, broad pods with short necks, blunt ends and 
parallel sides, and he says they are light green in color, well " sus- 
tained from the stem " and nearly all fit for use at one time, in sea- 
son with Wonderful. 

Sutton Prolific Marrow (Ref. 56 • was introduced in 1898 
by Sutton as an improvement on Dr. McLean, being " extraordi- 
narily productive and with deep green pods, 3 to 4 inches long, borne 
all over the plant, each containing 8 to 10 peas." This is probably 
the pea grown here and mentioned under " Prolific " (preceding 
page I. 

Leviathan iRef. 671, a Carter pea, was advertised in England 
in 1868, and in America in 1869, $1 a quart being asked for the seed, 
then a very high price. 

It was a main-crop or late, white wrinkled pea, 4 to 6 feet 
in height, with single, straight pods 4 to 4} 2 inches long, containing 
7 large peas of fine flavor. 

Extra Early Leviathan came to the Station from the University 
of British Columbia in 1922; and seems to be the same pea, slightly 
shorter-stemmed and smaller-podded under our conditions, and 
quicker in maturing because sown late. It gave a very poor yield. 

Edward VII. Refs. 68, 69; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:5. 1915. 
The Royal Horticultural Society gave an Award of Merit for Edward 
VII in 1901, but in 1910 erroneously described a test of this pea 
under King Edward VII, which name applies to a dwarf, green, 
wrinkled pea sent to the Society gardens in 1901 by Cullen. Edward 
VII was grown here in 1926 from seed produced at McMillan, 
Mich., on the test plats of the U. S. Department of Agriculture. 
The pea tested in South Dakota was probably King Edward VII, 
as it seems too dwarf and too large-podded for Edward VII, tho 
received under that name. 

As grown here Edward VII was 2 '4 feet tall, with very slender, 
unbranched stems, occasionally round at the base instead of angular 
as with most peas; foliage medium in color and amount, the small, 
broad leaflets often being in 2s only; pods borne singly on long, 
slender stalks, from the 7th node or 8th node, 2 to 3 inches in length, 
quite variable, moderately wide, very plump, straight, filled to tip 
and edge, blunt- to square-ended with a slight tip, light in color; 
peas 3-5, large, round oblong, of fair color, but of poor quality; 
seeds light cream-colored, about 100 to the ounce, very much 
wrinkled. The crop was not good, tho fairly early. 

TALL PLANTS 

Incomparable. Refs. 70—75. As might be expected from the 
name, there have been several Incomparable peas, two of which 
are of the cream-seeded, wrinkled type, and one of them, at least, 
grown in America. First of these was Ward Incomparable, intro- 
duced in 1847. Tho unknown in the United States under this name, 
British Queen and Tall White Mammoth, said by some to be identical 
with it, have both been listed in this country. Other authorities 
deny the synonymy; but say Incomparable was like Tall Mammoth 
in growth and like British Queen in seed. This Incomparable is 
described as Hay Mammoth. 

Hurst Incomparable, introduced in 1898, was grown at this 
Station during two recent seasons. 



Height 2'4 to 2 ] 2 feet (shorter than in England), without 
branches; foliage moderately abundant, dark green, somewhat 
whitened, especially on the large stipules; flowers from 8th node; 
pods on long, slender stalks, often paired, 3 1 , inches long, broad, 
moderately plump, straight, not well filled, with pointed ends, the 
dorsum also often sloping, lighter in color than the foliage (medium 
green 1 ; peas 5 or 6, large to medium, round oval, light green, of 
very good quality. The crops of pods were good or very good, 
but the poor filling of the pods lowered the yield of the peas. 

A French description of this pea makes the vine taller, foliage 
lighter in color, flowers single and beginning higher on the stem, and 
pods longer, plumper, better filled, and slightly curved at the tips; 
like Duke of York but nearly a week earlier and white seeded. 

Yorkshire Gem (Refs. 78; Rural N. Y. 17:113. 1888, 
Kans. Sta. Rpt. 2:151. 1890) was, apparently, first advertised 
in 1881, by Hurst, and first listed in America in 1888. It was tested 
by several stations, including this one, in 1888 and 1889, and from 
their notes the following brief description is compiled: 

Height 2 to 2 1 2 feet; stem stout, with very short internodes, 
branching; foliage light, bluish green, or " glaucous deep green," 
of 2 to 4, rarely 6, rather small, obtuse, faintly toothed leaflets 
and strongly waved stipules, not whitened; pods often paired, lighter 
in color than foliage, straight, 2 to 3 or 3 to 4 inches long; peas 4 to 
6 or 6 to 8, large, compressed, of good quality; seeds much flattened, 
" yellow " or " green and white," wrinkled. It was a late mid- 
season pea, and a good bearer, as indicated by such expressions as 
" pods very numerous," and " vines well covered with large, well 
filled pods." 

Canning. Ref. U. S. D. A., B. P. I. Bui. 21:282. 1903. 
This pea, origin unknown, was grown here in 1926 from seed secured 
from the U. S. Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich. 
It seems identical with Champion of Scotland and other varieties 
of that group. Griffith's Canning, listed by Tracy, was probably 
French Canner (Petit Pois). 

Glory of Somerset (Ref. 83) originated with Kelway before 
1913. It was grown at this Station from seed sent by the Idaho 
Station, but is probably not in commerce in America. It might be 
classed either as dimpled or wrinkled; but we follow the introducer 
and place it in this group. 

Height 2 [ 2 feet, foliage very dark colored; pods very large, 
varying greatly in different seasons, 4 s ., to 4"s inches, and 3 to 3 3 4 ' 
inches, respectively, broad, moderately plump, dark green, very 
coarsely wrinkled before picking time, straight or slightly curved, not 
well filled and with pointed or long-rounded ends, often dorsally 
pointed also: peas vary with the pods, 7 to 8 or 4 to 5, very large, 
oval or long oblong, dark green. The crops have been only 
fair. 

Royal Early. Ref. 84. Moore, in 1909, calls this pea new, 
but gives no history of it. 

As grown here for two seasons, it has varied considerably in 
height, from 2 ' 2 to 3 f 2 feet, plainly showing indeterminate growth; 
stems stout, with occasional basal or even medial branches; foliage 
large, abundant to dense, dark to medium green, only slightly 
whitened or glaucous; pods from 13th node, usually single but with 
some pairs, 2 :i 4 to 3 '4 inches long, plump, slightly curved, well 
filled, with blunt or square ends, of light color; peas about 6, much 
compressed, of fair color and good quality; seeds larger, less cylindri- 
cal, and more irregular than those of the Knight's Marrow group, 
but somewhat of that type. The variety is late and gives only a 
fair crop. 

Criterion. Refs. 86; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:260. 1884. This 
Criterion, a cream-seeded pea, was grown at this Station in 1884, 
but probably not elsewhere in the United States. 

It was introduced prior to 1874 by Standish of Ascot, Eng., 
and was quite favorably known in that country as a tall, second 
early pea. 

As grown here: Of medium height only, 3 feet; stems rather 
large, branched both at the base and above; foliage medium green, 
lightly washed with white on the leaflets and heavily on the stipules; 
pods often paired, 2 to 3 inches long, quite wide, plump, rounding to 
the ends, fairly good green in color; peas 4 to 8, pale green, oval, 
compressed in well -filled pods; seeds large 1 80 to oz.), much wrinkled, 
with a slight admixture of green. It was not very prolific, was 
ready in midseason and matured the crop rather promptly. 

Veitch Criterion, a green-seeded type, said to be superior to 
Telephone, has escaped all American mention. 

Sir Arthur Bignold (Ref. 98) was sent by Holmes to the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1913 and given an Award of Merit 
but failed to secure favorable notice in 1922. Seed of it was received 



98 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



by this Station in 19.22 from the Idaho Station, but is not known to 
have been grown elsewhere in America. 

It is exceedingly like Langport but with foliage decidedly 
lighter in basal color, tho less whitened and with smaller leaflets and 
stipules. The pods are of the same shape as those of Langport. 
decidedly longer, somewhat narrower, and of lighter color, coming 
very close to Telephone. It is rather earlier than Langport. but 
'v as Telephone in our tests. The seeds are slightly 
larger than those of Langport. otherwise indistinguishable from them. 
The crops were fair to good. 

Emperoi afMinom, Rcfs. 99; Hogg Card. Yr. Bk. 11:96. 
1873. Emperor of Marrows was advertised in 1871 by B. S. Wil- 



liams as a tall, blue, wrinkled, midseason or main crop marrow; but 
English references, one or two years later, apparently to the same 
pea, say it is a tall, late, white marrow much like British Queen. 

In our tests the seeds were of the same size and color, but 
rounder, showing little or none of the cylindrical shape, and more 
finely, but shallowly wrinkled, indicating very tender skin. The 
plants differed very little from those of British Queen, but had 
even denser, darker foliage: flowered and podded much lower on the 
stems, 14th node, bore pods mostly in pairs, and these were better 
colored, shorter, plumper, better filled, having 7 to 9 peas of fine 
color and good quality. The crops promised to be very good but 
were too late for accurate judgment. 



MINOR VARIETIES OF GEM GROUP 



l>riw l»«;irf Rcf. 3 was highly commended in various 
American horticultural periodicals for a short time after its intro- 
duction in 1 865 ; then dropped from notice. Its origin and parentage 
•re not stated, but it is called " a great acquisition." " really a fine 
sort; not the earliest, but can afford to wait for it;" " one of most 
valuable introductions," and " as good as Champion of England in 
quality." 

It was about 1 foot tall, branching profusely to form an erect, 
dense bush, with peas of large size, tinged bluish, slightly wrinkled, 
with tender skins unlike Champion of England ; medium early, and 
very productive. 

Ih. Shah. Refs. 6, 6a; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. .1:253. 1885. The 
Shah originated with Laxton before 1873, and was introduced in 
1876 by Hurst. It was tested at this Station in 1884, but was never 
much known in the United States. 

It was very early. " short -stra wed." with slender stem and 
pale foliage like Extra Earlies. rarely branched; pods above the 
6th or 7th nodes, single, short, 1 ' _• to 2 ' > inches, straight or slightly 
curved, very plump, and very blunt at the ends when well filled; 
peas 3 to 7. whitish green, much compressed in well-filled pods; 
seeds medium sized, cream colored, much wrinkled. Tho early, 
it matured slowly and was not very productive. 

Itli — Everbearing Ref. 16' originated with Arnold, and was 
introduced in 1884 by Bliss. It may have come by selection or 
crossing, from Yorkshire Hero, from which it was once said to be 
indistinguishable. 

The Yorkshire Hero of today has broader pods and larger peas 
than Everbearing: but the resemblance is otherwise close. 

Everbearing is taller than American Wonder, 2 to 2 ' 2 feet, 
occasionally 3, with short internodes. much branched, especially 
from ground level; foliage intermediate in abundance between that 
of Wonder and Gem. little whitened, with quite large leaflets, some- 
times in 6s. larger stipules, blunt -pointed; pods quite dark in color, 
considerably longer than those of American Wonder, reaching 3' 2 
inches, occasionally slightly curved at the tip, broad and quite 
blunt at the end; peas somewhat larger and the seeds decidedly 
larger than those of American Wonder, but of similar, rather coarsely 
wrinkled type, from 5 to 7 to the pod. and when dry are more 
frequently cream than green in color, often with a bluish shade. 
The variety is ready in late midseason and crops over a long period, 
giving a good, sometimes very good, yield. 

Everbearing may belong with Yorkshire Hero, rather than 
with Gem- Wonder peas: but uncertainty in regard to parentage and 
similarity of pods to those of Wonder place it here. 

I niversal Ref. 18 is placed with the Gems through lack of 
data for other grouping. It originated about 1893 with Childs. 

Said to be half-dwarf. 1 J , feet tall, requiring no support, 
ready two days after the earliest, and a good producer, averaging 
5 peas to the pod. 

\.r% Dwarf Wrinkled Rcf. 19 , a " border," or edging, pea 
:ich origin, grown at this Station in 1884. 

It appears to have been only 1 foot tall, with foliage of Little 
Gem type and pods more like those of American Wonder, with large 
peas and cream colored, much flattened, large, wrinkled seeds; 
rather early, ripening slowly and quite prolific. 

Vermont Wonder. Refs. 20. 21. Hoskins probably de- 
veloped Vermont Wonder before 1884. It had vines of the same 
size and much like those of Little Gem, was in season with American 
Wonder, 4 days after earliest peas, and said to be far ahead of it 
in productivity and perfection of pods. 

\ irk I»v.nrf Ref. 22 was tested by a Vermont pea grower 
in 1884, 1- ction. and was grown at this Station in 



1890. It was not listed by the introducers in 1892, being superseded 
by King of the Dwarfs. 

A fine, wrinkled variety, 6 to 8 inches high, a week later than 
American Wonder, and productive, some plants bearing 32, 2- to 
3-inch pods, slightly recurved, blunt-ended, with 5 peas of medium 
color and size. 

Cable Ref. 23 is credited to Alexander from an Advancer 
x Little Gem cross, made before 1885. It was on sale in 1889 and 
was tested by the Michigan and Vermont Stations in 1890. 

Ready two days after earliest in one test, and was 1 ' 2 feet 
tall, branching, short -jointed, strong-growing, with paired pods, 
often a dozen to the plant, each with 3 to 5 peas, large but not 
uniform, sweet, and wrinkled. 

Sutton Earl) Gem Ref. 24) was grown at this Station in 
1886. 

When sown on April 14, it gave usable pods in 56 days, with 
5 to 7 peas per pod and 7 to 9 pods per vine, all ready within two 
weeks. 

Kin:; ..f the Dwarfs. Refs. 25, 26: N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:330. 
1888. Vick King of the Dwarfs was introduced in 1886 and is prob- 
ably of Vick's own breeding, an American Wonder x Little Gem 
cross. 

As grown at this Station in 1887, it appears to have been 1 to 
l ] 4 feet tall, with a rather stocky, short-pointed, little-branched 
stem; and deep green foliage of small, smooth leaflets and larger, 
waved stipules, both distinctly whitened like Little Gem. The pods, 
usually borne singly on short stalks, were 2 ' 2 to 3 inches long, 
straight or very slightly curved, blunt -ended when fully developed, 
plump, smooth, paler than the foliage; and contained 5 to 7 roundish 
or slightly oval peas, much compressed when fully developed, whit- 
ish green in color and of unsurpassed flavor. 

It was nearly as early as Little Gem, a better bearer and of 
longer season. 

Sutton King of the Dwarfs, introduced in 1903, is similar to 
Vick, but more like American Wonder, and slightly earlier. This 
is probably not grown in America. 

Chelsea (inn. Ref. 27. Tho a pea of Gem type, Chelsea 
Gem has been included in the group of Cream-colored, wrinkled 
peas because of its unmixed cream-colored seeds. 

Delicious Refs. 28; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:330. 1888 1, tested 
at this Station in 1887, was listed by Gregory in 1888. The variety 
was brought from England many years before by a lady who said 
the pea had never been given to the public nor sold in any seed store. 

As grown here it was ready for use in 76 days from mid-April 
planting, grew about 2 feet tall, strong-stemmed, sparingly branched, 
with large, medium bluish-green foliage little whitened. The pods 
were often paired, straight or slightly curved, rather blunt, smooth 
surfaced and contained 5 or 6 rather large, pale green peas of specially 
good quality. Delicious was very prolific in New York, but not in 
Kansas. 

Earl] Epicure Ref. 29), not the Eckford pea, Epicure, 
appears to have been introduced by Henderson before 1889, when 
it was tested by at least two experiment stations and listed as already 
on sale. Its history was lost with Henderson's early records, but 
it was said to be an early, low-growing pea between American Wonder 
and Little Gem. 

One station record makes it a second early pea, the other very 
early, ready in 53 days from mid -April planting, or in 49 days when 
sown in early May. The second station says it was 2 ;j to 1 foot 
tall, usually with two strong branches, with small, bluish green, 
often slightly serrate leaflets, single or paired pods 1 ' ; to 2 inches 
long, slightly curved and with 4 to 6 peas of excellent quality, 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



99 



changing to cream colored seeds. A catalog reference says it was 
more prolific than Little Gem or Premium Gem. 

Echo. Refs. 30; Rural N. Y. 51:314. 1895. Echo origi- 
nated with Eckford, was introduced in 1890, and came to America 
in 1895. It received a First Class Certificate from the Royal 
Horticultural Society, but apparently was never widely grown, 
even in England. It was a very early, prolific, wrinkled marrow, 
2 feet tall, of very superior quality. 

Perfect Gem iRefs. 31, 32 ) was introduced in 1889 by Sutton, 
and Vaughan Perfect Gem, apparently the same pea, was listed in 
America in 1908. 

It was a second early, l l > to 2 ' -j feet tall, with dark green 
stem and foliage, paired, rather light colored, straight pods, very 
long (4 to 4'o inches in Vaughan's description) and broad, with 7 
large, very sweet peas. The pods were " so numerous as almost to 
hide the plants." 

The name places it in this section, but the pods are hardly 
of Little Gem, or even American Wonder type, tho more like the 
latter. 

Tom Thumb. Wrinkled. Refs. 33, 34. When Tom Thumb 
peas began to acquire wrinkling is unknown, the first specific mention 
of this character being in 1889. 

This development of Tom Thumb gives a plant with Little 
Gem foliage, but leaflets often only in 2s, smaller than American 
Wonder, ' 3 to J i foot tall, with short pods, 1 } 2 to 2 inches, in sea- 
son with American Wonder, straight and round, containing 3-6 peas 
of medium quality, changing to green, moderately wrinkled seeds. 

Tom Thumb Plentiful is a further development of this type, 
probably a cross, as the original Tom Thumb peas could hardly 
have developed good quality through selection alone. 

Height -3 to 1 2 3 feet, with paired pods, 3 inches long con- 
taining 6-8 large, compressed peas, of high quality. As early as 
American Wonder, more productive and matures its pods very 
promptly. 

Angell Premier. Ref. 35. This Gem-type Premier originated 
with Angell prior to 1890, when it was tested at this Station. It 
was apparently a very short-podded but productive pea, " one of 
the finest table peas tested here." It survived but a short time, as 
the company dropped it before 1892, tho it was listed by a New 
York State firm in that year. 

Angell Triumph (Ref. 38) originated as an Advancer x 
American Wonder cross, and was introduced in 1892. 

It was said to be " equal to American Wonder in every other 
respect, several days earlier, and at least one-fourth more produc- 
tive." It was 3 4 to 1 '4 feet tall, and from the figure given, more 
like Little Gem than American Wonder in pods. 

Empire State iRef. 38a! was listed by Everitt in 1900 as a 
new first early; but it probably did not originate with him. 

It was 1 1 4 to 1 ] 2 feet tall, with stocky stems, prolific of dark 
green pods filled with peas of fine flavor. The wrinkled seeds were 
green. 

Extra Early Manifold (Ref. 38b), listed before 1901 and still 
carried by McKenzie, is called the " standard dwarf marrowfat " 
for the West. 

It is 1 foot tall, with stout, heavy stem, medium green foliage 
and pods, the latter being 3 inches long, round, straight, blunt - 
ended, and containing 6 light green peas of good quality. 

Admiral Dewey iRef. 38c I, entirely distinct from Allan's 
Telephone-like pea so named, was listed in 1902 by Griffith & 
Turner and was probably just introduced by them. 

A " most excellent dwarf," shorter than Stratagem and a 
week earlier, with stocky vines, and long pods containing 10 delicious 
tender peas. 

Sutton May Queen. Refs. 39; Gregory Car. 1904. This 
May Queen, an American Wonder x Early Paragon cross, originated 
in 1884 with Culverwell, was listed in 1893 by Sutton, and reached 
America 10 years later. Sutton calls it an earlier, dwarf A 1; but 
as grown here it seems to fall better in the Gem group. 

In our tests, from British Columbia seed, it was l 1 ^ feet tall, 
with a more slender stem than Little Gem, unbranched, with a 
medium amount of non-characteristic foliage; pods short, of Wonder 
type and node of bearing, on long, slender stalks, usually not well- 
filled, containing but few large, round, oval, light green peas; seeds 
were large, mixed cream and light green, oblong, indented and well 
wrinkled. It was a first early variety, and gave good crops. 



Nott Perfection (Ref. 41) originated with Richard Nott 
who crossed his Excelsior with Premium Gem to get it. It was 
introduced about 1895. 

Later and taller than Nott Excelsior, 1 '4" to 1 J^ feet, stems 
much branched, foliage of Little Gem type, but less whitened, tendrils 
quite noticeable; flowers from the 11th or 12th node; pods single 
and paired; about 2 5 g to 3 inches long, rather narrow but plump, 
well-filled, rather blunt -ended, medium green in color; peas 5 or 
6, medium to large, light green, of fine quality. It gave very good 
crops. 

Eclipse (Wrinkled) (Ref. 44a) is now hopelessly confused 
with Surprise, and probably was never more than a selection from 
that variety made by Cleveland before 1898. 

It seems to have been rather shorter-stemmed and longer- 
podded than Surprise, with a slight curve toward the tip of the pod, 
and more productive of pods of American Wonder type. 

Durban Market Garden. Ref. 46. The Alexander Seed 
Co. introduced Durban Market Garden in 1901, and carried it for 
several years. It was of the American Wonder class, earlier, and 
with larger pods, which, from the illustration given, were somewhat 
curved 

Herald (Refs. 47; Denaiffe L. P. P. 44. 1906) was an English 
pea, probably known in America only through U. S. Department of 
Agriculture tests in 1903. 

The South Dakota Station reported it as 1 ' s feet tall, with 
about 5 flat pods to the vine with 5-6 peas each, which were tender, 
very sweet and of very good flavor. The French references say 
the variety was somewhat similar in height and color of foliage to 
American Wonder, 5 or 6 days later, with quite broad pods, 2J4 to 
2% inches long and slightly to considerably curved. 

Extra Early Honey Sweet (Refs. 11, 49) was introduced about 
1906, " after actual test for several years," by Buckbee, who still 
carries it, tho it is not mentioned elsewhere. 

The plants are taller than those of Little Gem, 2 ! 4 feet, and 
with smaller, rather longer, leaflets. The pods, more often paired 
and borne on longer, somewhat slenderer stalks, are of Gem type, 
more uniform and usually more blunt at the ends, and fully as 
well filled with peas decidedly larger, oval and indented by crowding 
in the pod. The seeds are Gem-like. The variety is a few days 
later than Little Gem and decidedly more productive. 

Tho quite similar, this is apparently distinct from Honey 
Sweets, later described, as it is earlier, flowers lower on the stem and 
is smaller-podded. 

Washington Wonder (Ref. 51) was introduced by Lilly 
about 1907. It was too tall for American Wonder, 1 '3 feet, but of 
that type, early, prolific and large-podded, with 6 to 9 good-sized, 
well-flavored peas to the pod. 

Vaughan Forcing (Ref. 52), introduced about 1908, was said 
to be a " small and wonderful edition of American Wonder," with 
pods similar in shape and size, borne on plants " 3 inches dwarf er " 
and of upright habit. This can hardly be Sutton Forcing of the 
Large-podded, Dwarf group, as pods of that variety are said to be as 
large as those of Gradus. 

Honey Sweets (Ref. 53) was introduced by Northrup about 
1907 and carried for at least 15 years. 

As grown here it was taller, 2} 2 feet, than the introducer's 
figures of 1 to l 1 ^ feet, and in other respects more like Little Gem 
than American Wonder in stem and foliage, tho with the lightly 
clasping stipules of the latter. It flowered higher on the stem than 
either, 12th node; pods paired and single, like those of American 
Wonder, on long, thick stalks, 2 "' g to 3 ' s inches long, when paired, 
decidedly longer when single, quite broad, almost plump, very 
slightly curved; peas between those of Gem and Wonder in size, 
rather more to the pod, but less compressed, of poor color and not 
of the best quality; seeds of American Wonder type. 

Honey Sweets was nearly two weeks later than American 
Wonder, but productive and matured the crop promptly. Differ- 
ences between this variety and Extra Early Honey Sweet are noted 
under the latter. 

100% Profit. Ref. 55. J. Bolgiano introduced 100'; Profit 
in 1914. 

It was apparently a somewhat taller American Wonder, 
1 '4 to l ;i 4 feet tall here (1 foot given by the introducers'. It was 
not quite as early as Wonder, but had larger pods, 2"s to 3 '4 inches 
long, more often paired but then much shorter, averaging 6 or more 
large, dark green peas of excellent quality, with seeds of Gem type 



100 



THE VEGETABLES OE NEW YORK 



but larger and even more wrinkled. On our soil they became \ 1 1 y 
dark green. The variety was not quite as productive as the best 
of the group. 

Green Pod. We have found no references to this pea, but 

l e c e iv ed seed of it from the Idaho Station in 1922, and grew it for 
one season only. 

Plants ntnuit same in size as Little Gem. more erect; stems 
stout, with short internodes; branches Few, basal and medial; 
foliage less abuiul.uu than that of American Wonder, lighter green. 
pods single, of recent or improved Gem type, borne from 7th node 
I inches long or often shorter, shghtlv curved, with 
blunt nds and long tips. ; very uniform, large, 

oval, much indented, of attractive light green color; seeds like 
of Little Gem. An early niulsciison pea of only average 
productivity. 

LARGE PODDED 
POINTED POD SECTION 
Marvel Refs. 1; Rural N. Y. 39:251. 1880) originated with 
before 1873, probably as a Prolific Long-pod x Veitch 
Perfection cross: received " First Class " from the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society: and was advertised for sale by Veitch (1) in 1878. 
It was noticed in America in 1880. tested at this Station in 1883 and 
and on sale in this country in 1889. 

Height. 2 to 3 feet, branched at base and above; foliage 
ample, often wavy, rather deep bluish green, with large, slightly 
glaucous, slightly whitened stipules; flowers imperfectly opening 
from 10th node; pods paired, on short, strong stalks. 3 to 3 ' ■>, rarely, 
4 inches long, nearly straight but appearing curved because of the 
strongly arched vent rum and slight curve at tip. broad, quite plump, 
with long-rounded ends, and rather noticeable tips: peas 8 or 9, large, 
whitish green in color and somewhat compressed when full grown; 
seeds light cream in color and somewhat oblong, slightly wedge- 
shaped, flattened and well wrinkled. Yields very good, ready in 
late midscason. maturing quite promptly. 

Green Prolific Ref. 2 ' was sent to this Station for testing in 
1885 by Bennett but was not reported in the year's pea trials. 

Habit stocky, only ' _, foot tall; foliage fine, deep green, slightly 
whitened; pods paired, medium green, 3 to 3 ' i inches long, broad, 
decidedly curved, with long-rounded ends; peas 6 to 8, rather small, 
pale green, slightly oblong, somewhat compressed. 

Daniels Matchless Marrow, and Sutton Matchless 

Marrowfat) or Matchle — . Refs. 3-5. Much confusion exists 
between the many " Matchless " peas, of which some have already 
been described; but those named above were considered as one by the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1905. Sutton dropped Marrowfat 
from the name in 1912. So far as known Matchless Marrow or 
Marrowfat has been grown in America only in tests at the University 
of British Columbia, at this Station and by the United States Depart- 
ment of Agriculture. The variety originated about 1887 as a Ne 
Plus Ultra x Veitch Perfection cross. It is a second midseason or 
main-crop variety. Rather tall for this group but would be shorter 
in most American conditions. 

Height 6 feet to 3 feet, in different tests; foliage scanty, pale 
green, much whitened, 4 ' ■> to 5 inches long: pods mostly paired from 
about 14th node, broad, often inflated, straight, pointed at the 
ends, dark green with some bloom; peas 7 to 8, large, dark green; 
seeds of medium size, more or less compressed, well wrinkled and 
faintly bluish or greenish cream in color. The crops were good. 

Sutton Perfection Refs. 11 ; Rice Cat. 1918,1 originated with 
Culverwell sometime previous to 1890 when introduced. It did 
not reach America until 1918. 

In our tests it was a little taller than Dwarf Telephone but 
with stouter stems holding it more erect, less often branched, with 
larger leaflets and round-tipped stipules, clasping the stems more 
deeply: with less prominent tendrils; flowers from 14th node; pods 
usually longer, 3 i to 4', inches: sometimes shorter, broader, less 
plump, more wrinkled at harvesting, rather better colored, very 
slightly curved, not as well filled, less rounded at the ends, and 
without noticeable tips; seeds quite uniformly yellowish light green 
in color, rather than mixed cream and green, larger and more 
wrinkled than those of Dwarf Telephone. The two varieties matured 
at the same time, late midscason, and crops of both were only fair. 

Bentpayer. Refs. 12; Galloway Bros. Cat. 1913. This 
Rentpayer. entirely distinct from Rent Payer, was introduced by 
H. Brownhill, Sale, Eng.. about 1895; and was said to be a Duke of 
Albany x Little Gem cross, with pods and peas like the former and 
plants of the same size as those of Little Gem. As grown here, from 



Melbourne Market. Seed of this pea came to us from the 
U. S. Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich., and it 
was grown here in 1926. It is very similar to some older peas of 
the Gem group, but apparently differs from each in one or more 
characteristics. 

Height about 1 ' _> feet, erect or slightly drooping; stem moder- 
ately stout, short -jointed, unbranched, foliage- medium to abundant, 
dark to medium green in color, with bluish tint, whitened especially 
on the stipules, and with noticeable white veins, the 4 or 6 leaflets 
small and long, and the slightly larger stipules are sharp-tipped; 
flowers above 9th node, bringing the pods at the top of stems, 
on short, stocky stalks, very even, 2 ' _. to 2 ■' , inches long, narrow, 
plump, straight, rounded to blunt at the end, and well filled; peas 

4 to 7, moderately large, round, light green, of good to very good 
quality. It was a second early pea, and very productive. 

DWARF GROUP 

English seed, the variety corresponded very closely to this descrip- 
tion, expecially when pods grown at McMillan, Mich., were 
substituted for those produced under rather poor conditions at the 
Station. 

Height, 1> 2 feet; pods (McMillan) 4', to 4' 2 inches long, 
broad, oval in cross section, considerably curved, pointed to long, 
rounded at the ends, with short but distinct tip, deep green in color, 
well tilled; peas 7 to 9, very large, indented, oval to oblong, medium 
green in color and of very good quality; seeds very large, mingled 
cream and green, but only moderately wrinkled. Crops, fair to good 
and ready in late midseason. 

Productive Marrowfat Refs. 13; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. HTy.5. 
1904) was listed by Sutton in 1896, and was brought to America for 
testing in 1903. It was grown in our tests from British Columbia 
seed; but full data were not secured, owing to poor stand. The 
description is partly compiled. 

True dwarf, seldom over 2 feet; foliage dark green; pods 
medium green, 3 '■ , to 4 : ' g inches long, straight, broad, long-rounded 
at the end and without distinct tips, smooth, and not well filled; 
peas, 4 to 7, large, smooth, round, irregularly oblong, almost dark 
green in color, of very good quality; seeds well wrinkled, light green, 
medium to large in size; crop matured in late midseason; elsewhere 
good or better than good. 

Sutton Forcing Refs. 14; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:5. 1904) 
came from a Culverwell cross between Royal Jubilee and American 
Wonder, introduced in 1896. 

As early as American Wonder, even more dwarf; with pods 
almost as large as those of Gradus, and similar in shape. Only 
3 to 6 pods were produced on a plant, and the pods contained only 

5 or 6 good peas. 

Electric Refs. 49, 50), not Electric Extra Early, was listed 
by the Harnden Seed Co., Kansas City, Mo., in 1913, and probably 
originated with them. It is still listed in the mid-west, but appar- 
ently never extensively grown. 

As tried here, dwarf 1 to 1 ' i feet , with unbranched, stout 
to medium, erect stem; foliage abundant, dark green but whitened 
and glaucous, appearing lighter, similar to that of Peter Pan; flowers 
begin at the 7th node; pods single, on short, thick stalks, similar in 
shape to those of Peter Pan, being slightly curved, poorer in color, 
average half an inch less in length, rather less pointed, better filled; 
peas also light in color; seeds much like those of Laxtonian and 
Blue Bantam but rather more uniformly light green, over cream, 
making a rather distinctive coloration. Electric is very early for 
the group, tho hardly a first early; and gives good to very good crops. 

Little Midget Refs. 51, 52) originated in 1913, with Condon 
as a Gradus x Sutton Excelsior cross; apparently listed only by this 
firm. 

In plant exceedingly like Blue Bantam, but with less bloom 
and with broader leaflets; flowers rather lower on the stem. 6th node, 
and flower and pod stalks slightly less stocky; pods fully half an 
inch shorter, light in color, and less well filled because of abortive 
ovules; peas rather light colored; seeds very like those of Electric, 
with even more light green or bluish green shading of the few cream 
colored ones. Because of poor filling of the pods and general 
conditions the crops of Little Midget were only poor to fair, tho as 
early as Electric. 

Early hut <.imm1 (Ref. 55) was introduced in 1916 but not 
originated by Elliott (2). 

Very similar to Peter Pan. about the same in height, having 
dark luxuriant foliage, broad, curved, pointed pods 3j/£ to 4 inches 
long, medium green in color, and ready in early midseason. Quality 
rather than productivity was stressed. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



101 



President Wilson Ref. 56) was introduced by Sutton in 
1919: and probably grown in the United States only in tests. Seed 
of it was sent to this Station by the University of British Columbia. 

Plant of Blue Bantam type, but more branched, with broader 
leaflets similarly square at the tip; flowers higher on the stem, 11th 
node; pods on similar short, thick stalks, correspond very closely 
in size, shape, and content of peas to those of Blue Bantam; pods and 
peas of rather better color, but season later and crop not as good 
under our conditions; tho the variety is said to be exceptionally 
productive in England, where it is called a " new Dwarf Defiance." 
Pods are longer than those of that variety and often inflated. 

Dwarf Perfection Ref. 57) was introduced in 1922 by Tait. 

Very close to Blue Bantam, but slightly more dwarf, with 
stouter and more erect stem, more branched especially from the 
upper stem; foliage similar, including square or cut-in tip of leaflets; 
pods like those of Blue Bantam, possibly a trifle shorter, distinctly 
broader, rather better filled; seed differences very slight. Dwarf 
Perfection seems a day or two later and holds rather longer; crops 
about the same; so that the two varieties seem horticulturally 
identical if not actually so. 

Re^al i Ref. 59) originated with Bruce before 1919. Not 
found in the United States; but grown here from British Columbia 
seed. 

Very similar to Progress, even more dwarf; but flowering a 
node higher, 9th. and the flowers are small and few in number 
at any one time. Flower and pod stalks frequently bear small 
leaves at the joint between peduncle and pedicel; pods straight, 
rather less plump and not curved like those of Progress, dark green 
in color; ready about as early; crop good to very good. 

Superb Marrow. Cataloged and probably raised by Brand. 
It was grown here from British Columbia seed; and belied its name. 
Tho dwarf and early, the pods were small, rarely reaching 3 inches, 
often containing only 2 or 3 peas; and yield very poor. Superb 
Marrow was noteworthy as an instance of the complete change 
from cream-colored seeds sown, to green seeds harvested, the colors 
in each case being almost unmixed. Brand says it was 3 feet tall 
with pods containing 9 or 10 large peas of good flavor. 

Bedford Champion (Ref. 60) originated with Laxton Bros, 
and was distributed in 1923 by originators and by Hurst. As 
S. T. Wright, it received an Award of Merit. It is as yet commer- 
cially unknown in the United States; but was grown here from the 
originator's seed. 

Height half that given for England, l}-£ to 1 3 4 feet; and the 
pods were very short, so it is not thought well to give our descrip- 
tion. It is said to be similar to Gradus, but much more robust, 
as early, or earlier, with long, very dark green pods, straight or 
slightly curved, with long-rounded to pointed ends, and containing 
8-10 large peas. The seeds are very large, irregular in shape, mostly 
light green, but with some cream. It ranks as a second early pea, 
and under better conditions gives very good crops. 

Giant Stride (Ref. 61 i originated with Carter from a cross 
made in 1916 " with the object of securing on Mendelian lines a 
dwarf pea bearing pods as large as Quite Content." Seed of the 
pea was distributed in 1925; but the variety is not known to have 
reached America commercially tho included in U. S. Department of 
Agriculture tests, and grown here in 1926. 

Height about 1 3 4 feet; stem very stout, but droops from weight 
of pods, unbranched; foliage abundant, medium green, with white 
veins and added whitening, especially on stipules, but little bloom, 
with large broad leaflets in 4s or occasionally 6s, and somewhat 
larger, round-tipped stipules; neither tendrils nor flowers character 
istic; pods single, from 10th or 11th node, on short, very thick stalks, 
often leafy, the longest found on any dwarf pea, quite uniformly 
4 :! s to 4 3 4 inches, occasionally 4 inches, only moderately wide, 
plump, smooth surfaced, slightly curved toward tip, often poorly 
filled, showing a tendency to " pufnness," rounded to blunt at the 
ends, rich light green in color with much bloom; peas 7 or 8, not 
large for the size of pods, ratio of peas to pods being 1:2 '4, round, 
smooth, dull dark green, losing color in cooking, not of superior 
quality: seeds above medium in size, nearly round, only slightly 
indented, well but coarsely wrinkled and light bluish green in color. 
It is late midseason pea, and gave a very good yield of pods, fair of 
peas. 

Warlock Prize (Ref. 62) is a pea " from the South of Eng- 
land " introduced in America by Breck and tested here. 

Extremely dwarf, 3 4 to 1 foot; stem moderately stout, holding 
the plant erect, with occasional basal branches: foliage abundant, 
dark green, much whitened, with stipules much larger than leaflets, 
sharp-tipped, serrate well toward the tip; flowers begin at the 6th 



node or 7th node, distinctly creamy in bud but open lighter, with 
green at the base; occasionally paired; pods rarely paired, on short, 
thick stalks, similar to those of Peter Pan, but with curve mainly 
toward the tip; better filled; peas 5 to 9, averaging 7, very large, 
round to indented, oblong and flattened, sometimes wedge-shaped! 
almost dark green in color, of very good quality, sweet but not 
especially tender; seeds resemble those of Peter Pan, but are rather 
better colored. Warlock Prize is a second early or early midseason 
variety and gave a good yield. 

California Gem. Originated in that State several years 
ago, was named by W. R. Palmer, Cowichan, B. C, who received 
it from J. A. Beedham, Victoria, and he from a California gardener. 

Very similar to Green Gem, half a foot taller, without medial 
branches, with conspicuous tendrils and flowering at 11th, instead of 
9th node: pods one-quarter inch longer than those of Green Gem, 
heavier walled and holding freshness better, with more and smaller 
peas. In season these two Gems differ materially, California Gem 
being very late, and only moderately productive. 

Arcadian. We grew this pea in 1926, from seed produced on 
the United States Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan. 
Mich. 

Plants were of Dwarf Telephone size and type, slow-growing, 
foliage rather darker, tho more whitened or with a yellowish tint, 
with very large leaflets, occasionally 5 in number, and round-tipped 
stipules; flowers very large, creamy or greenish white, beginning at 
the 11th or 12th node, in pairs, stalks rapidly lengthened so those of 
the pods were long and heavy: pods 4 to 4 ! v inches long, broad, 
moderately plump, straight and decidedly long-pointed, but with 
distinct tips, medium to light green in color, wrinkled before ready 
to harvest, holding freshness only moderately well; peas 5 to 6, 
very large, compressed almost to squareness, oblong, dark green in 
color, and of good quality. It was a midseason variety and gave 
a good to very good yield. 

El Paso Wonder (Ref. 62a) was listed among peas grown in 
1925 on the U. S. Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, 
Mich. It originated in the El Paso Valley " several years ago " 
from a cross between Stratagem and Gradus, and is very popular 
there as it stays green during hot weather. It is said to have 
exceptionally large pods, equal in size to those of Dwarf Telephone, 
the pods growing mainly on one side of the plant and picking easily. 
It grows about one foot high and is very vigorous. 

BLUNT PODDED SECTION 

Dwarf Prolific. Refs. 64; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:270. 1885; 
Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:77. 1873. Dwarf Prolific is one of the 
earlier peas originated by Dr. McLean before 1865 from crossing 
Beck Gem with one of the " best wrinkled peas " of his time. It was 
tried at this Station in 1884. It plainly showed Beck Gem influence. 

Height 1 ' 2 to 2 feet, with stout, branched stems, dark green 
foliage, more or less whitened and glaucous ; pods 2 to 2 J 2 inches 
long, usually paired, slightly curved, very plump, blunt-ended, 
medium green in color, containing 4 to 7 pale green, slightly oblong, 
much compressed peas, or pale green or cream, well-wrinkled seeds. 
It was rather late, matured promptly and was moderately prolific. 

Hogg gives this name as a synonym of Royal Dwarf, a smooth 
seeded pea. 

Imperial Champion (Ref. 78) originated before 1885 with 
Horsford. It was also sent to England, but apparently won favor 
in neither country. It was much more dwarf than Horsford Market 
Garden, with broader, more curved pods and larger peas; earlier, 
and apparently quite prolific, averaging 14 pods to the vine and 
4 to 5 peas to the pod. 

Sensation (Refs. 81; S. Dak. Sta. Bui 91:7. 1905) origi- 
nated with Laxton, before 1885, but was distributed in 1886 by 
Harrison (2). It was tested at the South Dakota Station in 1904, 
and grown here lately; otherwise unknown to America. 

It is of Sutton Excelsior type but shorter, 1-1 '4 feet tall, 
more erect, unbranched, with rather smaller leaflets, blunt at the 
tip, and with fewer, heavier, and lower teeth on the stipules; pods not 
quite as large, but rather more plump, straight, more blunt at the 
ends, and almost tipless, better filled; peas fewer, larger, of better 
color and better quality; seeds large, almost cubical except for 
indenting and wrinkling and among the darkest green of all peas. 
Sensation is very late, requiring about 10 weeks for table use; 
but gave good to very good crops. 

Blue Wrinkled (Ref. 82) originated with the Specialty and 
Novelty Seed Co., Newton-le-Willows, Eng., and was tested at this 
Station in 1888. It was of Horsford Market Garden type but larger 



102 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



in plant and pod, with more bloom on foliage and deeper green color 
on pods. 

Dwarf Main Crop iRef. 83 I was from the same source as the 
preceding variety, and also tested here in 1888. It was of Sutton 
Excelsior type, and seems to have resembled it in most characters, 
but later and with much less wrinkled, green and white seeds. 

Renown (Refs. 84; Rural N. Y. 51:314. 1895) originated 
with Eckford, before 1890; and was brought here in 1895, but did 
not gain a permanent place. 

Apparently of Horsford Market Garden type; and said to be a 
fine main crop variety, robust, 2 ' o feet tall, with abundant, deep 
green, square-ended pods and peas of first rate quality. 

Sutton Favorite. Refs. 85; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:5. 1904. 
This, one of many Favorites, was introduced by Sutton in 1895, and 
was tested, for cooking quality especially, at the South Dakota 
Station in 1904 and 1905, the two tests not agreeing. The variety 
has probably never been in commerce in the United States. 

It is quite different in type from most of the varieties in the 
group; dwarf, IJ2 to 2 feet tall; stems fairly strong, internodes 
short, branched above ground level; foliage dark green; pods single, 
light green in color, coarsely wrinkled or covered with shallow, 
irregular protuberances, about 3 ' 2 to 4 inches long, very broad, 
flattened-oval in section to almost flat at edge, short rounded to 
nearly blunt at the end, with noticeably flat tip; peas about 6, 
large, pale green, sweet. It is a second early, said to bear an 
abundant crop of its broad, heavy pods. 

Pierremont Gem (Refs. 88, 89) was distributed by Kent 85 
Brydon, in 1898, and grown in tests in this country in 1903 and 1904. 
It is said to have originated from a double cross (Earliest of All x 
Sharpe Queen, x American Wonder). 

Its dwarfness, 1 to 1 '4 feet, places it in this group rather than 
with Ne Plus Ultra, which it is said to resemble in pods. These 
were borne singly, were noticeably square-ended, 2 3 4 to 3'.j inches 
long, broad and straight, dark green, contained 6 or 7 large, wrinkled, 
bright green peas, and were borne singly or occasionally in pairs 
from 9th or 10th node. It was a second early, about a week later 
than American Wonder; and gave fair yields. 

Ideal (Refs. 90; Steckler Cat. 1918) originated with Sutton, 
in 1901; but apparently was not listed here until 1918, and even now 
is but little known. 

It is taller than Sutton Excelsior, 2 '4' to 2 J 2 feet, with rather 
slender stems, making support advisable, with medium length 
internodes, and only occasional basal branches; foliage less abundant, 
finer, with stipules glaucous and much whitened by large spots 
and blotches, bloom scanty; flowers white, borne singly from the 
8th node; pods dark in color, from a quarter to a half inch shorter 
than those of Sutton Excelsior, but much plumper, occasionally 
thicker than wide, and saddle-backed, well filled to the short- 
rounded or blunt end which bears a distinct tip; peas few in number, 
rarely over 5, but very large, round or slightly indented, oblong, 
dark green in color, sometimes with a yellowish tint; seeds much 
smaller than the size of the green peas indicates, ranging from 104 
to 121 to the ounce, roughly spherical, somewhat indented, only 
moderately wrinkled, and may be, from different sources, largely 
cream with some grayish green, about equally cream and medium 
green, or practically all good medium to dark green. Ideal is fully 
as early as Excelsior, and gave good crops. 

Victor and Victor Marrowfat. Refs. 92-94; Barnard 
Car. 1921. Three peas, of the same or confusingly similar names, 
fall in this section, none of which has been grown in our tests, 
or sufficiently described in American catalogs to make identity 
certain. 

In chronological order these are: 

Eckford Victor, originated by Eckford about 1883, as a 
Champion of England x Advancer cross. It was dwarf, 2 ' ■> feet 
tall, robust, with paired, fine, well-filled, square-ended pods con- 
taining 6 or 7 large peas. It was second early in season. 

Victor Marrowfat, introduced by Carter, was only IJ2 feet 
tall, of bushy habit, with dark green foliage and paired, dark green 
pods containing 7 large, " delicious " peas. It also was apparently 
a second early, and a " good cropper." 

Victor, introduced by Veitch (1), is described in the Pointed- 
podded section of this group. 

Of the American grown pea of this group, we know only that 
it was a productive, midseason variety, 2 feet tall, with large, dark 
green pods, and peas of excellent quality. 



Sutton Ineomparable (Refs. 95; Rice Cat. 1918) was 
introduced in 1908. Because of failure to recognize it as distinct 
from Hurst Incomparable, the Sutton pea was not grown in our 
tests. 

It is recorded by American seedsmen as one of the best main 
crop varieties, about 3 feet tall, very sturdy, with large stem, and 
producing a heavy crop of 5-inch pods, very broad, square at the 
end and dark green in color. English descriptions add branching at 
base, flowering at 14th node, pods single and paired, inflated. In 
America it matures with Telephone or earlier, in England is called 
second midseason. 

Perfection (Ref. 96), one of the largest peas so named, is of 
unknown origin; but is apparently distinct from all others. It was 
grown here from seed from the Pacific Coast, where it seems to be 
best known. It may be Veitch Perfection. 

It is very similar to Yorkshire Hero but more drooping in 
habit, with only scattered medial branches, larger and more regular 
shaped leaflets in 4s as well as 6s, much larger, round-tipped stipules 
more deeply clasping, both leaflets and stipules being distinctly 
glaucous as well as whitened; pods borne singly from the 13th or 
14th node on short, thick stalks, often half an inch longer than those 
of Yorkshire Hero, and average somewhat larger, tho less uniform, 
even broader, but not quite so plump, straight, better filled to the 
tip but not to the edge, blunt to square at the end and without dis- 
tinct tips; peas not so large nor so much compressed, oblong, and 
medium green in color; seeds average one more to the pod and are 
decidedly smaller than those of Yorkshire Hero, deeply indented, 
not as well wrinkled and with a larger percentage cream colored, 
with little or no bluish shading. Perfection is earlier than York- 
shire Hero but not as good a producer. 

Top O" Th* Morn iRef. 97) originated with Keeney and was 
introduced by Vaughan in 1919. It was also sent to England about 
1915; but apparently attracted little attention. It was grown here 
from both originator's and introducer's seeds. It is of Sutton 
Excelsior type, but differs from it in several points. 

Rather more dwarf, 1 to 1, ! '2 feet, more erect; foliage rather 
less abundant and decidedly lighter colored, with leaflets not as 
broad, and stipules blunt-tipped rather than rounded, with shallow 
teeth and more glaucous; tendrils small and inconspicuous; pods not 
as broad, plumper, wrinkling earlier, better filled, rather more blunt 
at the end and without noticeable tips, medium green, not holding 
freshness well; peas 5, medium to large, medium green, indented, 
oval to oblong; seeds a trifle larger but otherwise very similar to 
those of Excelsior, becoming much more wrinkled and greener in 
color under some growth conditions. 

Early Dwarf, or Prinee Arthur. Refs. 98-100; Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 41:287. 1915. Catalogs of the firm and the 
reference given above indicate that Sutton first introduced this pea 
as Early Dwarf in 1910 and changed the name in 1915 to Prince 
Arthur, under which name it was " Highly Commended " by the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1920. 

It was grown here in recent tests, under the second name, from 
seed from British Columbia, and from the introducer, but is not 
known to be on sale in the United States unless it be as Rice Early 
Dwarf, which is very similar to, if not identical with. Prince Arthur. 
Rice describes his early dwarf as a dark-podded Sutton Excelsior. 
Our descriptions gave the pod color as medium green (Rice " very 
dark green " I, which was the only marked difference between it and 
Prince Arthur, a dark-podded pea. Rice Early Dwarf and both 
strains of Prince Arthur were 4 or 5 days earlier than Excelsior. 
To say that Prince Arthur and Rice Early Dwarf are early, dark- 
podded and slightly more dwarf, Sutton Excelsior well describes 
each variety. Neither was quite as productive as the older variety. 

Record Breaker Siv \\ ccks (Ref. 102) originated with, and 
was introduced by, Salzer previous to 1923. Different stocks of it 
were grown here, so differing in characteristics that we must depend 
on a letter from the introducers for partial description. Vines dark 
green; leaves medium size; pods 2 > 2 to 3 inches long, round, blunt, 
containing 6 or 7 peas. 

Bestever Ref. 103) originated with A. R. Ward, and was 
introduced by the Grand Junction Seed Co. in 1924. 

As grown here: Height 2'o to 3 feet; stem rather slender, 
unbranched; foliage scanty to medium, light green, with leaflets 
in 4s, above medium in size and breadth, and much larger, round- 
tipped stipules, only slightly serrate, both whitened and somewhat 
glaucous; flowers from 6th to 7th node, very low for such tall plants, 
single and in pairs on long, slender stalks; pods 3 to 3} i inches long, 
moderately broad, very plump, straight, well filled to the rounded 
tipless ends, and very light in color; peas about 7, of medium size, 
not much indented, oval to oblong and yellowish green in color; 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



103 



seeds large, round oval, sometimes almost cylindrical, almost equally 
cream and green, well wrinkled. It is very early and bears good 
crops. 

DAISY SECTION 
Mayflower. Refs. 106; Breck Cat. 1913; letter from Jas. 
Carter 8s Co., April 19, 1927. Mayflower originated with Carter 
in 1899. from a cross between Daisy and Wm. Hurst. It is not 
much known in the United States and is now not listed here, the 
seeds for our tests coming from British Columbia. 

As grown here it is very dwarf, not reaching a foot in height, 
unbranched, darker in foliage but lighter in pods than Buttercup, 
and with more pointed pods; peas similar in shape, but also lighter 
in color, and seeds all light bluish green and well wrinkled. It was 
a first early or early variety and gave very good crops. In recent 
English tests it seems to have lost its earliness. 

Model Mayflower, originated by the same firm in 1910, a 
selection from Langley Gem, has not reached the United States. 

Daffodil (Refs. 107; Johnson Seed Co. Cat. 1909) is also a 
Carter pea, introduced a year later than Buttercup and Mayflower 
and said to be a distinct improvement on British Wonder. 

It was noticeably "bunchy" in early growth, 1}{ feet tall, 
with moderately stout stem, erect but drooping with age and weight 
of pods; unbranched; foliage rather scanty; leaflets in 2s and 4s, 
slightly glaucous, dark green, large, very broad, having blunt or 
notched tips; stipules varying from slightly smaller on lower nodes 
to much larger above, dark green but whitened and very glaucous; 
blossoms began &t 10th node, single; pods 3 inches long on short, 
heavy, often leafy, stalks, straight, rather slender, long rounded at 
the ends, sometimes dorsally pointed, without tips, dark green, 
and well filled; peas 5 to 9, very large, indented, ovate or oblong, 
sometimes wedge-shaped, dark green. The pods were heavy walled 
and held their freshness and color well. It was almost first early 
in season and gave good crops. 

Swastika, Te Aroha, and Good Luck. Refs. 108-111. 
It is practically impossible to say how many varieties of wrinkled 
peas are included in the names given above; and Good Luck is also 
used for a smooth-seeded variety. The Swastika symbol betokens 
good luck, and Te Aroha is the Maori word for " Good Luck," this 
name being applied to a pea originating with F. Cooper, Wellington, 
New Zealand. Swastika, listed in 1909 by Vick, differs very little, 
in the characters that are given, from Te Aroha as tried here from 
seed grown in the U. S. Department of Agriculture plats in northern 
Michigan, but is quite unlike Swastika as grown at this Station from 
British Columbia seed. The latter seems to correspond to the Te 
Aroha listed by Burnett Bros., while Good Luck, listed by the 
Routledge Seed Co., but probably from Hawaii originally, is appar- 
ently the same as Vick's Swastika and Te Aroha from the U. S. 
Department of Agriculture collection as we grew it. The differ- 
ences, as nearly as we can determine, are of plants, rather than of 
pods and seeds ; and these might easily vary in the many changes in 
locality made. Bunchiness of the growth from upper internodes 
was noted for all the varieties or strains that we grew. 

The pods are recorded as 2 3 4 ' to 3}'2 inches and 2)2 minimum 
with 3 to 3 :, 4 usual, for the two lots, both being noted as " uneven," 
other variations in description sheets are " broad " or " moderately 
broad," " plump " or " moderately plump," " straight " or " very 
slightly curved," and number of peas 3 to 7 or 4 to 8, and size of 
peas " very large " or " large." The pods were " rounded " or 
" rounded to pointed," and medium green in color, none of these 
differences being clearly enough cut, or so characteristically grouped, 
that separation of the two types is possible. They were the same 
in season, second early, and neither gave better than a fair or fair 
to good crop. 

Perfect (Ref. 17) was offered in 1899 by Burpee; was carried 
only a short time by that firm, and apparently nowhere else listed. 

Height 2)2 to 3 feet; growth vigorous: foliage large. It was 
late, probably above average in yield, and bore 4)2 to 5 J 2-inch pods, 
1 inch broad, with " greatly sloping points," containing 5 to 7 large, 
dark green peas of finest quality. 

Edwin Beckct. Refs. 18; Johnson Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 
This pea was named for its originator, Edwin Becket, gardener on a 
large English estate; and introduced by Cutbush about 1900 when 
it received a First Class Certificate from the Royal Horticultural 
Society. It is supposed to be a Gradus x Duke of Albany cross, 
and in England would undoubtedly be placed in the Telephone 
group. As grown in the United States, however, it is semidwarf. 



Height 2" 4 feet, about half a foot more than Dwarf Telephone; 
stems more slender, unbranched; foliage light green; leaflets rather 
larger; stipules rounded, less serrate and much whitened; flowers 
large, distinctly green at the base; pods shorter, borne singly from 
the 8th node up on long, slender stalks, more like those of Early 
Morn, being poorly filled and long rounded at the tips; peas similar 
in shape and size to Dwarf Telephone; of very good quality, but 
not as sweet as some other varieties, possibly through premature 
disappearance of the sugar, which the very noticeable wrinkling 
might indicate; seeds nearly all light to medium green in color, 
and among the best and finest wrinkled of all varieties grown. 
It was a midseason variety of poor productivity. 

Market Master (Ref. 19 1 was introduced in 1900 by Johnson 
& Stokes, and said to be a new pea from England. 

It was grown here recently from British Columbia seed; 
and seemed much like Dwarf Telephone reduced in height, 1 3 4 to 
2 feet, but flowering and podding much higher up the stem, 14th 
to 15th node, and not so frequently branched; foliage similar, but 
more whitened, rather coarser, and with round-tipped stipules; 
pods slightly broader and flatter, poorly filled and more pointed, 
without distinct tips, rather light in color; peas larger, more indented 
and more oblong, poor in color, but of good quality; seeds very light 
bluish green, smaller and more wrinkled. Season was the same, and 
crop rather better than that of Dwarf Telephone. 

Dwarf Junibo. Ref. 20. Only scanty details are given of 
Dwarf Jumbo, introduced by Salzer in 1901, but figures for height, 
1*3 to 2"3 feet, and pod length, 6 inches, place the variety in this 
group; the illustration shows pointed pods. It was classed as early. 

Green Gem. Refs. 21, 22; Darling Car. 1913. Green 
Gem originated with Sutton, was introduced in 1901, and received 
an Award of Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1905. 
It was many years in reaching America and has never been widely 
grown, tho having an attractive pod, and peas of high quality. 
Seed of it came from the Idaho Station and from British Columbia. 

It was very similar to Market Master, but not quite as tall, 
with larger foliage, deeper green, but more whitened, and bearing, 
from the 9th node, single pods on short, thick stalks, hardly as long, 
but more uniform, giving about the same average length, rather 
more pointed, with a distinct dorsal slant to the point, without any 
distinct tip, not quite as well filled, but of much better color, as 
were the peas. It was a week or ten days earlier than Market Master 
or Dwarf Telephone, but not very productive. 

King Edward VII. Refs. 23, 24; Portland Seed Co. Cat. 
1909. Much confusion exists between King Edward, King Edward 
VII, and Edward VII, distinct varieties, but the one here referred to 
was sent for trial to the Royal Horticultural Society in 1901 by 
Cullen, and was later listed by Carter as King Edward VII Dwarf. 
It probably first reached America in 1908, was listed by several 
western firms, but was not found for our recent tests. 

It was evidently very similar to Green Gem, the dark color of 
foliage and pods being emphasized; and both English and American 
references give its height as 1 J 2 feet. It was said to bear paired, 
pointed pods, and to yield heavily. In tests at Wisley in 1925 
(Roy. Hoit. Soc. Jour. 52:107. 1927) it is called second early, 
and said to resemble Sherwood, but with pointed pods. 

Matchless Wonder (Ref. 25) was introduced in 1901 by 
Northrup, as a wrinkled pea as early as Alaska, lJ-3 to 2} 2 feet tall, 
with large pods, broad and occasionally slightly curved, very long 
pointed and with long necks. 

Dwarf Giant-podded. Refs. 26-28. J. Bolgiano listed 
Dwarf Giant-podded Prolific Green Marrow as early as 1901 and 
later sent us packets labeled " Prolific " and " Green Marrow " 
which proved identical with the pea under the longer name. Appar- 
ently the same pea was listed by Burpee in 1904 under the short 
name, but no clue is given to the history unless Alexander Prolific, 
originated about 1885, is the original variety. This, the data given 
for Alexander's pea are not extensive enough to confirm; but do not 
contradict. 

As grown here, as Dwarf Giant-podded, or as Prolific (from 
Bolgiano), very similar to Dwarf Telephone, but with darker, 
coarser foliage, round-tipped stipules clasping the stem very deeply; 
producing small flowers higher on the stems, 15th to 17th node; 
pods very similar, not as well filled, better colored; peas larger and 
better colored. The season is the same and Dwarf Giant-podded 
the better producer. 

Victor Marrowfat (Ref. 29) was introduced by Carter about 
1904, and probably never reached America. It is mentioned here 



104 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



through similarity of name to Veitch Victor, which follows; but it is 
described with Victor in the second section of this group. 

Veitch \ i< lor. Refs. 30; Barnard Cat. 1921. Victor origi- 
nated with Veitch (.1) and received an Award of Merit from the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1910. It was apparently first listed 
in America in 1921. 

As grown in our recent tests, nearly a foot shorter than Dwarf 
Telephone, stout-stemmed and erect, with branches almost entirely 
medial, darker and larger foliage, decidedly whitened, having round- 
tipped stipules with heavier teeth near base; pods dark green. 3 1 _. 
to 4 ] 4 inches, broader, hardly as plump, rather more pointed at the 
ends and not quite so well filled, tho normally with two or three more, 
lighter colored peas. These were large, oblong, and flattened almost 
to disk-shape in well-filled pods. The seeds were much larger than 
those of Dwarf Telephone, oblong, very much indented and flattened, 
fully and deeply wrinkled, but rather coarsely, and from light green 
to deep green in color. Good to very good crops of pods were ready 
in early midseason, and the peas were of high quality. 

Record. Refs. 31: Breck Car. 1914; letter from Breck, 
Mar. 14, 1927. Record came to America from W. W. Johnson 
in 1913. As grown at the Station, the Record, in plant at least, 
seemed like World Record, and a recent letter from the Amer- 
ican introducer says Johnson's name for it was World Record. 
Johnson's stock probably came from Sutton. 

Commander Ref. 53 was listed as new by Eckford in 1908, 
but apparently has never reached America except for tests. 

It is very similar to World Record but with glaucous, heavier 
foliage, the leaflets as well as the round-tipped stipules showing 
serrations, on the former as notches near the tip; flowers much higher 
on the stem, 13th node, and occasionally, like the pods, in pairs; 
pods very' much larger than those of World Record, 4 to 4 '■'■ * inches 
for the general run, but often 3} 2 inches only; broad, not plump, 
straight but sometimes distorted thru poor filling, with long-rounded 
ends; peas 7 to 8 in well-filled pods, of medium size, not compressed, 
oval, medium green in color and of only fair quality; seeds much like 
those of World Record, but lighter, more bluish green in color. 

Commander is a second early or early midseason variety of 
better than good productivity, hardly very good. 

Peacemaker iRef. 34 distinct from the Telephone-like pea 
later named by Kelway, was introduced by Ebbert about 1906. It 
was a dwarf (2 feet tall , second early variety, bearing paired pods, 
slightly curved at tip, with long-rounded ends and small tips, and 
containing 10 peas. It has been found only in the catalogs of this 
company, but carried by them until 1925. 

Oatawa Ref. 35 was brought from the Pacific coast by 
Leonard, some time before 1907. The name, of Chinook Indian 
origin, means " get up and get." It is said to be earlier and more 
dwarf than Potlatch ; and the latter is a midseason pea about 2 ' . 
feet tall. Clatawa has " pods like Telephone." 

Dainty Duchess (Ref. 36 is an English pea, brought to the 
United States in 1907 by Johnson Seed Co. 

The variety was grown here from British Columbia seed. 
Similar to World Record, but not quite as tall, 1 3 4 feet, with much 
more abundant and darker green foliage, and larger, rounded stipules; 



flowers much higher, 14th node; pods 3'£ to 3}^ inches long, not 
quite as broad nor as plump, heavy walled and smoother, and rather 
better filled; peas indented, oval to oblong, very well colored; seeds 
light bluish green, and bluish white rather than cream. It was ready 
with Dwarf Telephone, late midseason, and gave a better crop. 

Laxtonian Hybrid. Seed of this pea, of unknown origin, 
was received at the Station from the University of British Columbia 
and by them from the Dominion Experimental Farm at Sydney. 
It was half the height of Laxtonian; with pods of almost the same 
size but more uneven. For the size of the plants it bore as well as 
Laxtonian and was the same in season. 

Mount Rainier. Ref. 38. In 1907 the Mount Rainier 
pea was already well known and said to be yearly increasing in favor 
in the State of Washington; but seems never to have been known in 
the East, and was discarded commercially some time after 1913. 

It was a robust, heavy-stemmed variety, 2 to 3 feet tall, and 
needing support, with rich green foliage; pods, from the illustration 
given, often paired, on long stalks, straight, somewhat slender but 
plump, with long-rounded or pointed ends without tips: peas 6 to 10, 
large, succulent. It was a late midseason or maincrop pea. 

Early Duke Ref. 41 \ originated with Carter as a Blue 
Express x Duke of Albany cross, and was introduced, after several 
years' testing, in 1913. 

Except as included by Carter in his American catalogs and as 
grown at this Station and by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, 
Early Duke appears unknown in America. It may be called a 
slightly taller, earlier Discovery, with shorter, plumper, slightly 
curved pods, and rather fewer, smaller, and lighter colored peas 
i3'4 to 3 3 4 inches': branches few: foliage less abundant, lighter in 
fundamental color and more whitened, but the stipules are notice- 
ably darker in color than the leaflets. Season same as Laxtonian, 
but the yield is poor. 

Lancashire Lad (Ref. 43 is an English pea, sent to the Royal 
Horticultural Society for testing in 1911, by Yates, and later listed 
by at least two seedsmen. Except in tests at this Station and by 
the U. S. Department of Agriculture, probably unknown in the 
United States. One of the dwarfest of the group, less than a foot 
tall as grown here, tho 2 J 2 feet tall in England, in season with Dwarf 
Telephone, with shorter and plumper pods, and a better cropper. 
Dc6ance (Ref. 48 1 was listed by Darling before 1913; but did 
not originate with them. It seems to differ from any English pea 
of the name, and is not Laxton's Dwarf Defiance, a Stratagem type 
pea, tho similar to it in some ways. 

Grown in our tests from Idaho Station seed; about 2 feet tall, 
with a few fairly well-developed medial branches; foliage rather 
scanty, medium to dark green, with very large leaflets and stipules; 
flowers large, white, distinctly shaded green, borne from the 13th 
node up; pods 3 '4 to 4 inches long, sometimes much smaller, rather 
narrow for the group, not very plump, long rounded or pointed 
with dorsal slant, medium green in color, usually well filled, but 
noticeably hard to shell; peas 4 to 8, large, more or less indented, oval 
to oblong, yellowish dark green. The seeds were medium green 
in color. One of the latest varieties in the group, requiring 10 weeks 
from mid-May sowing; not productive, either with us or at McMil- 
lan, Mich., where it was also studied. 



MINOR VARIETIES IN ADVANCER GROUP 



Princess of Wales (Refs 4. 5; U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. (Agr.) 
1865 was introduced by Sutton about 1864, and listed in the report 
on Agriculture of the U. S. Patent Office in 1865, but apparently 
did not find favor in America. It was grown in England for half a 
century at least, and was also long known in France. In trials by 
the Royal Horticultural Society, Princess of Wales, Turner's Won- 
derful, Carter's not Sutton's 1 Prince of Wales and Yorkshire Hero 
were all considered identical with McLean Favorite. 

It was very prolific, like Advancer, but later, with shorter, 
somewhat broader pods, clustered near top of plant, and very light- 
colored peas. 

Dr. McLean. Refs 8, 9 Gregory Car. 1879; S. Dak. Sta. 
Bui 91:5. 1905. The Dr. McLean pea was raised and introduced 
by Turner, about 1875. and named for one of England's most famous 
pea breeders. It is said to be a seedling of Advancer, resembling it 
in many ways, but in England considered superior. It was brought 
to the United States in 1878 but never found such favor here as did 
Advancer. 

Height 2}-£ to 3J^ feet; stems stout, branched; pods often 
paired from 12th node, bringing them well toward tops of plants, 



rather like those of Stratagem, arched but little curved, 3 to 4 inches 
long, with long-rounded or pointed, tipless ends, whitish green in 
color, wrinkling early. Season that of Advancer, but pods ripen 
more slowly. 

An Improved Dr. McLean, from entirely different breeding, 
was introduced by Sutton about 1896, and reached the United 
States for trial about 10 years later, but, like the older form, has 
been little grown. It has better pods, larger, with more blunt ends, 
and more and smaller peas. Both forms were grown here in recent 
tests and the older one in 1884 also. 

Edinburg Beauty. Refs. 10; Rural N. Y., 41:562. 1882; 
Kans. Sta. Rpt. 2:163. 1890. Edinburg Beauty was advertised 
in 1881 by two leading English seedsmen; but it seems to have been 
noticed more frequently in America than in England. It was 
introduced here, apparently by Cleveland, about 1882. The notices 
are mainly those of tests at stations, including this one, and on other 
trial grounds. 

An improved Advancer, slightly earlier, prolific: height 1 J^ 
feet, stocky, very short internodes: foliage green, leaflets 2-4, 
rather small, narrow; rather uneven, 1 Yz to 3 inches long (usually 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



105 



2 to 2 3 j\ often paired, sometimes poorly filled, but. when good, 
with 5 or 6 compressed peas of good quality: two weeks after earliest 
peas. The " improvement " was evidently in the dwarfness and 
earliness. as Edinburg Beauty was said to be the " earliest dwarf " 
wrinkled pea. 

Racket Refs. 13. 14 originated with Horsford in 1879. 
Racket and Horsford Market Garden came from peas in the same 
pod, the parents being Alpha and American Wonder. 

Racket seems to have been entirely overshadowed by its twin 
variety, as test records alone remain of it. In plant and foliage it 
resembled Alpha and in pod Advancer; was no earlier than Advancer 
and ripened slowly. It sometimes reached 5 feet in height, tho 
usually 2 J _. to 3 feet. 

A 1. Ref. 15; Card. Chron. 12:73. 1892; Gregory Cat. 
1904. A 1 came from a cross between American Wonder and 
Paragon, and was introduced by Sutton in 1891. It won a gold 
medal at the great Temple Show in 1896. It was first listed in 
America in 1904; but has never won popular favor. 

As grown here in recent tests, from British Columbia seed, it 
gave short, light green pods of Advancer shape, with only 4 or 5 
whitish green peas. The plants were more like Alaska than Advan- 
cer, having slender stems and scanty, light green foliage with leaflets 
in 2s and 4s. It flowered low on the stem, about the 8th node, and 
would have given very good yields had the pods been larger and 
better filled. It was nearly a week earlier than Advancer. 

Exonian Refs. 16; Thorburn Car. 1893 was introduced by 
R. Veitch about 1887 when it received a First Class Certificate 
from the Royal Horticultural Society. A much later English 
reference said Oxonian i?'i appeared to be a selection from Alpha or 
Dr. Hogg, and other references note its similarity to Alpha. It 
reached America in 1893, and was listed by several seedsmen. Our 
last record of it in the United States dates 1915, but seed of it was 
obtained from British Columbia in 1922. It was also known in 
France, being described by both Denaiffe and Vilmorin. 

As grown here it was much earlier than Advancer, with scan- 
tier foliage and smaller pods containing 4 or 5 small peas of fine qual- 
ity. The pods were dark green at first, but lost color rapidly even 
on the plants, tho the peas were much better in color. It was not 
productive. 

Favorite. Refs. 17, 18; Nebr. Seed Co., letter Dec. 6, 1922. 
Unless Favorite of the first references, which is said elsewhere to be 
" a very dwarf type of Yorkshire Hero," is McLean Favorite, its 
origin is unknown. Our first reference says that McLean Favorite 
and Yorkshire Hero were both identical with the old Princess of 
Wales. The figures for this Favorite, practically the only data 
given, make it more dwarf than Princess of Wales. 

Favorite of the Nebraska Seed Co. is said by them to have 
been a sport of Prince of Wales, and quite similar to it. It has been 
discarded. 

Burpee Quality and Burpee Quantity. Ref. 19. Qual- 
ity and Quantity originated with Arnold, and were introduced by 
Burpee in 1888. They differed only in height, and yields, Quantity 
being taller, and supposedly more productive. 

Quality, as grown here, was about 2} 2 feet tall, branched, with 
dark green foliage, flowering low on the stem, about 5th node, and 
bearing single and paired pods about one-fourth inch shorter than 
those of Advancer, but very similar in shape, possibly a trifle broader 
and containing 3 to 5 very large, light colored peas. It was slightly 
earlier than Advancer, but not as good a cropper. 

Seed of Quantity was not found for our tests, and both varie- 
ties seem to have practically disappeared. 

Childs Morning Star Ref. 21 is said to have been intro- 
duced about 1894. 

As tested on the Rural Experiment Grounds in 1899 it was 
ready for use midway between Surprise and Gradus, produced twice 
as many pods as Gradus, which were 2 to 2 ] i inches long, round 
and well filled with small wrinkled peas of good quality. It resisted 
drouth well. It was probably more dwarf than Advancer. 

Startler Ref. 22) was listed in 1894, without history, by 
Buckbee. It was a late pea, of Advancer habit of growth, with 
better colored foliage and pods. The latter were often paired, 
almost cylindrical, but usually showed more dorsal pointing of the 
ends than Advancer. 

Major iRef. 20/ is said to be an English pea, introduced in 
this country by Henderson, in 1891. Tho tested at various places it 



did not equal the early claims for it; and was soon dropped, even by 
the introducer, for Heroine, Juno, Sharpe Queen and other earlier, 
larger-podded, more productive peas. 

It was 2)^2 to 3 feet tall, with fine-leaved, dark green foliage, 
single pods 3 to 4 inches long, broad, straight, blunt-ended with 
large tips, and often poorly filled. When perfect they contained 
5 or 6 very large, oblong peas of good quality. It was nearly a week 
later than Stratagem, late midseason. 

C P. R. k Ref. 22a) is a Canadian pea, introduced before 

1901 by Bruce. 

It is described as the " best maincrop, blue wrinkled marrow," 
2 feet tall, with sturdy, branching stem, large, slightly curved pods, 
filled with fine, deep green, delicious peas. 

An Improved C. P. R. is noted in recent Bruce catalogs. 
Gardeners' Favorite. Ref. 23. Griffith & Turner said in 

1902 that Gardeners' Favorite was " named and introduced by 
them," but this probably occurred some time before the date given. 

The very scanty descriptive notes and the figure of a pod-laden 
plant make the variety seem like a stocky, much branched Advancer 
with pods more rounded at the end, a view confirmed by our tests 
of it here during three recent seasons, except that the pods are 
slightly narrower (more slender I than those of Advancer, rather 
than wider as the figure would indicate, and contain smaller peas. 
It is later than Advancer, fully as productive, with rather darker 
foliage but no better colored pods or peas. 

Sutton Abundance. Ref. 24. In 1906. Sutton announced 
as a novelty an Abundance pea. This, from the descriptions given 
by Sutton and by the Royal Horticultural Society, in whose gar- 
dens the pea was several times tested and from whom it received a 
First Class Certificate, appears to be of Advancer type. The stock 
was not well selected at first and two strains have developed, one 
of which is twice as tall as the one originally described. 

One of the strains of Abundance grown here seems to be clearly 
Sutton's pea of the taller-stemmed strain, altho the seedsman from 
whom we obtained our stock listed Abundance, not otherwise 
qualified, before Sutton Abundance was announced. Probably a 
change of stock was made at some time by which one Abundance 
was unintentionally substituted for the other. 

The plant differences between the two peas are slight, but the 
pods of Sutton Abundance are seldom paired, are nearly an inch 
longer and proportionately broader, less blunt at the ends and con- 
tain larger peas. The seeds also are decidedly larger than those of 
Advancer. Except for this apparently accidental introduction, 
Sutton Abundance is probably not known in America. 

Vigorosa (Ref. 25', announced in 1906 by Buckbee, is a short- 
stemmed Advancer. 

Height 2 feet; pods very plump, well filled, frequently paired 
but borne more toward the top of the plant so that the crop is not 
quite as good as that of Advancer or Abundance, and is slightly 
later. The pods and peas are rather better colored than those of 
Advancer and peas larger. 

Home Delight (Ref. 26) was listed by Hastings in 1907, as 
having been grown for several years. His description would not 
identify the variety, but as grown here it is apparently Advancer, 
with possibly rather slenderer pods and smaller peas. 

Cracker Jacks Ref. 27) was listed by J. Bolgiano in 1907. 
but had been grown previously. 

As tried here, much like Advancer, later, and not as productive. 
The pods are decidedly longer, not as plump, and often show ten- 
dency to a dorsal sloping to the point, from a distinct enlargement 
of the pod near the end. The seeds are much larger than those of 
Advancer. 

Pride of Cahuenga (Ref. 28) grew in the Cahuenga Valley, 
California, before 1908, and attracted attention of a Mr. Wiltfong 
by its great productiveness. After successive destruction of crops 
by floods, seed was secured for distribution by Johnson & Musser. 

It is shorter than Yorkshire Hero, about IJ2 to 1 3 4 feet, more 
branching, with very numerous, paired pods, 3 inches long, very 
plump, almost round in section, sometimes almost saddle-backed, 
with shallow indentations between the 7-9 large peas, square- 
ended, with large tips. It was said to be " undoubtedly the best 
pea ever put before the public;" and was found " most promising " 
in three years' testing at the Yuma. Arizona, Experiment Farm of 
the U. S. Department of Agriculture. 

Yankton Maincrop Ref. 291 was introduced in 1909 by 

Gumey. 

About the size of Advancer, said to be 2 feet tall by the intro- 
ducers, but 2j^ to 2 3 i feet in our tests; stem moderately stout, 



106 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



drooping, occasionally with medial branches: foliage abundant, 
rather large, leathery, dark green, somewhat whitened, with leaflets 
in 4s and 6s, and sharp-tipped stipules; flowers at the 13th node, 
in pairs on medium length, heavy stalks: pods paired, 2}4 to 3 
inches long, of medium width, plump, sometimes slightly saddle- 
backed, straight, well filled, and blunt-ended with small tips; peas 
about 5. medium sized, round oval, medium green, of good quality, 
seeds rather small, round oval, indented or almost cylindrical, well 
wrinkled, mixed cream and light green in color. The season is 
about that of Advancer, and the crops good to very good. 

Old Colony (Ref. 30 > was listed in 1913 by Breck but seems 
to have been dropped from subsequent catalogs. 

It was described as a large wrinkled variety, two weeks later 
than Mayflower, with vines 1-3 to 2's feet tall, bearing large pods 
containing 7 or 8 peas; and the figure given shows the pods to be of 
Advancer type. 



Delicacy (Ref. 31 1 was first listed by Sutton in 1922, and has 
been grown in this country only in an experimental way. It was 
said to have all the good points of A 1, with greater vigor, and better 
crops of larger, darker colored pods. 

As grown here it was only 2 feet tall; flowered at the 9th or 
10th node; the pods were short, plump, square-ended, contained 
about 5 very large, well-colored peas, and were ready for use several 
days before those of Advancer. It gave very good crops. 

Boston Wrinkled, of unknown origin, was grown at the 

Station from seed sent by the University of British Columbia, the 
variety coming to them in 1919 from the Central Experimental 
Farm, Ottawa, Canada. 

It was of very good Advancer type, decidedly later, and pro- 
duced good to very good crops of slightly larger, very plump, firm 
pods of fair color, as were the 5 to 7 moderately large peas. 



MINOR VARIETIES OF STRATAGEM GROUP 



John Bull. Refs. 6; Jour. Hort.. n. ser. 3:137. 1880; 
Mass. Hort. Soc. Trans. 170. 1882. From a Veitch Perfection 
x Prolific Longpod cross, Laxton secured this Stratagem-like pea 
which he advertised in 1880. This was brought to America in 1882 
and listed by several American seedsmen for 10 years. 

It was grown at the Station in 1884: much taller than Strata- 
gem, 2 to 3 feet, more branched, with foliage less whitened; pods 
often paired, decidedly longer, 3 to 4}^ inches, slightly curved, 
lighter in color, with rather fewer and larger peas to the pod, which 
were whitish green in color, flattened but not compressed. It was 
very late, ripened gradually, and moderately prolific. This was 
called both a " taller Stratagem " and a " dwarfer Telephone." 
It was similar to Sharpe Triumph and some authorities give the 
names as synonyms. 

Another John Bull, a Senator-like pea. was later introduced 
by Carter. 

Pride of America (Ref. 9) was received from Carter and 
grown at the Rural Experiment Grounds in 1886; but no other 
references to the variety have been found either in America or in 
England. Resembled Stratagem but about 10 days later, producing 
very large peas of Stratagem quality. 

Astouisher. Ref. 10. Benham's Astonisher was tested at 
the Rural Experiment Grounds in 1892 and found " like Stratagem." 
Majestic (Refs. 13; Thorburn Car. 1908) was introduced in 
1898 by Carter and reached America 10 years later. An improve- 
ment on Stratagem, with larger, dark green pods, but taller and a 
few days later. 

Nott Prolific. Ref. 14. This Prolific originated with Nott 
about 1899, from an Alaska x Prince Edward cross. Said to have 
the hardiness of Alaska and the size and sweetness of peas of Prince 
Edward. 

Probably belongs in the Stratagem group, tho the plants were 
taller, pods larger and peas more numerous, 7 to 9. An early mid- 
season variety, not specially productive but reliable under practi- 
cally all conditions. In quality it probably ranked with Stratagem, 
not equal to the best wrinkled peas, but better than any smooth- 
seeded one. 

Ambler Magnum Bonum (Refs. 17, 18) was tested by the 
Royal Horticultural Society of England in 1901; and in 1902 was 
received for testing in the United States from F. Ambler, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada. 

Apparently a good Stratagem-type pea; height \Yi to 2 feet; 
foliage and pods deep green; latter paired, long, straight, well-filled; 
peas 6 to 8, immense, light green, of highest quality; medium early. 

Battleship (Refs. 19; and S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:5. 1905) 
was introduced by Carter before 1902, when it was tested by the 



Royal Horticultural Society. It is said to come from a cross between 
Thos. Laxton and Duke of Albany. It was tried in America in 
1904, and recently by the United States Department of Agriculture 
at McMillan, Mich., and at this Station. 

Height in England, 5 feet, here only 3 or 4 feet ; stem stout, un- 
branched; foliage deep green, coarse, much whitened; flowers large, 
greenish white, from 10th to 12th node; pods singly or rarely in pairs, 
on long slender stalks, 3 to 3' 4 inches long, broad, straight, very 
blunt ended with large tips; peas about 5, very large, light green, of 
good but not the best quality. It is a midseason pea, but lacks 
productiveness in America. 

Livingston First Choice (Ref. 23) was introduced in 1906. 

Height about l 1 ^ feet, foliage medium green; pods like those 
of Stratagem in color and size, " very numerous;" peas large, dark 
green and of fine quality. This appears to be different from Vick 
First Choice. 

Bent Paver (Ref. 24) was sent to the Royal Horticultural 

Society for testing in 1910 by Jas. Veitch when it was found to need 
more selection, showing many tall, weak stems. 

In 1923 the stock was much better. Height 2 feet; stems 
stout, foliage dark green; pods single or paired, 3 ! 2 inches long, 
straight, broad, pointed, dark green in color; peas 5 to 7, large, 
fairly sweet, wrinkled. As grown here from English seeds, coarser 
in foliage than Dwarf Defiance; pods from 8th node on long thick 
stalks, 2 7 % to 3 ' % inches long, quite uniform. It was said by various 
English authorities to be an " improved form of Stratagem type," 
and " Dwarf Defiance." Here, as late as Stratagem and only a fair 
cropper. 

Another Rentpayer was noted at McMillan, Mich., on 
U. S. Department of Agriculture plats, of which pods were sent here 
when ready, late in the season, and found to be unlike those on Rent- 
payer. The McMillan variety was apparently Brownhill's Rent- 
payer, with Telephone-like pods, described elsewhere. The simi- 
larity of names makes it difficult to say which of these varieties is 
referred to in American catalogs. 

De Giorgi Model (Ref. 25) was listed in 1914, apparently as 
new, and was grown here for three seasons. 

Dwarf. 1 ] 2 feet: stem stout, branches few or none: foliage 
medium green, with large leaflets and slightly larger, whitened, 
round-tipped stipules; flowers begin as low as on any variety studied, 
about the 3rd node; pods single on short stalks, large for dwarf 
plants, 3's to 33^ inches long, not very broad nor very plump, 
straight, rounded to blunt at the ends, with small tips; peas 5 to 7, 
medium sized, oval, light green to medium green. Seeds well- 
wrinkled, weigh about 100 to the ounce, mixed cream and light 
green in color. It is an early midseason variety, but not very pro- 
ductive in the North, tho said to yield heavily in the Mississippi 
Valley. 



MINOR VARIETIES IN CHAMPION OF ENGLAND GROUP 



Hairs Dwarf Marrow. Refs. 14-18. Much confusion of 
names and synonyms exists between the various Green Marrows, 
since very similar names were applied in and just before 1850 to 
Knight Marrows and their derivatives and to a smooth green pea, 
similar in type to the American white marrowfats. Hairs Dwarf 
Green Mammoth Knight Marrow, here described under a shorter 
name, appears to have been first advertised in 1850 by Duncan 
Hairs, and was an improved Knight Dwarf Green Marrow, or an 
intentional or accidental cross with that variety as one parent, as 
it had decidedly larger pods, and was nearly two weeks earlier, the 



original being the latest of the Knight peas. Hairs' pea was brought 
to America in 1856 by the United States Department of Agriculture, 
listed commercially in 1858, described by Burr in 1863. and was 
still listed in 1892 after which Gregory replaced it with Delicious. 
It is no longer grown in America unless the Dwarf Green Marrowfat 
of a few southern seedsmen is this variety. 

It was hardy, strong and vigorous in growth, low and bushy in 
habit, with dark green, whitened foliage: pods singly or in pairs. 12 
to 16 to the plant, broad, slightly curved, blunt-ended, larger than 
those of Knight Dwarf Green Marrow, comparatively flat, and con- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



107 



taining 6 or 7 large, compressed, sweet peas, changing to cream or 
bluish green seeds. It was ready in midseason and very productive. 
It was grown at the Station in 1883 and 1885. but only sum- 
maries were printed of the extensive notes taken. These notes show 
the variety very similar to Knight Dwarf Green Marrow, with paired 
pods, longer and better filled than those of the older variety, making 
it very prolific. 

King of the Marrows. Refs. 19-23; U. S. Pat Off. Rpt. 
Agr. 1865; Evans Cat. 1868. Hogg Card. Yr. Bk. 11:109. 1873. 
Waite's King of the Marrows was advertised by Sutton in 1854 
as new. It was listed by the U. S. Department of Agriculture 
in 1865, and commercially in 1868. It was still cataloged in the 
United States in 1889, but not found in seedsmen's lists of 1901. 
Hogg, in 1873, gave King of the Marrows only as a synonym of 
Tall Green Mammoth. 

It was a very tall, late pea of the Knight Tall Green Marrow 
class but with much larger pods and larger, greener seeds. An early 
reference notes its resemblance to Ne Plus Ultra, but later ones say 
it is very like British Queen of Knight Tall White Marrow type ), 
but with green seeds. A French description shows the foliage to be 
similar to that of Champion of England, and says the pods are square 
at the end. It was a prolific variety yielding over a long period. 

Monarch. Refs. 22. 23; Country Gent. 17:143. 1861; 
Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:109. 1873. Monarch was advertised in 
1856 by Hurst, who had purchased the stock for that year from Epps, 
the originator. The Royal Horticultural Society said in 1860 that 
the variety was the same as Tall Green Wrinkled Mammoth, with 
which King of the Marrows was also said to be identical; but refer- 
ences to both Monarch and King of the Marrows are found preceding 
any to Tall Green Wrinkled Mammoth. Probably all three varieties 
originated at practically the same time through the selection by 
different growers of similar variations in Knight Tall Green Wrinkled 
Marrow. Monarch was advertised in America as " new " in 1861 
by at least two firms. Monarch was considered by Hogg, also, 
only as a synonym of the variety below. 

Tall Green Mammoth. Refs. 20, 21, 23-26. Except for 
its use as a synonym in a reference dated 1857, the first notice of 
Tall Green Mammoth, in 1859, gave no indication of its previous 
history. 

Of the group of three varieties regarded as identical, of which 
this variety is the last, only this has been grown at this Station, in 
1884: but the other names are given as synonyms. It was not found 
in American seedsmen's catalogs. 

It appears to have differed very little, under American condi- 
tions, from Knight Tall Green Marrow, was of the same height, 
but had longer internodes. darker green foliage, and rather longer 
pod stalks. The pods were apparently of the same length but 
narrower and plumper, light green in color, and contained fewer 
peas, on the average, which were slightly larger. The seeds were 
very pale green or almost white, and much wrinkled. It was earlier 

MINOR VARIETIES IN 

Lord Raglan. - Refs. 14; Thorburn Cat. 1861 : Hogg Gard. 
Yr. Bk. 14:109. 1873. This pea was selected from Hairs Dwarf 
Mammoth in 1852, and offered for sale in 1854 by Epps. It 
reached America in 1861, but never gained favor. Tho hardly of 
Ne Plus Ultra type. Lord Raglan is included here because of its 
resemblance to Veitch Perfection. 

It was only about half as tail as Ne Plus Ultra, much earlier 
and more prolific, tho not as early as Dwarf Mammoth, with pods 
fully as long or longer than Ne Plus Ultra, slenderer, and almost 
scimitar shaped, and peas smaller and not as good in quality. Hogg 
says it was intermediate in season between Hairs Dwarf Mammoth 
and Veitch Perfection, but unworthy of growing because of poorly 
filled pods. 

Omega. Refs. 21: Thorburn Cat. 1873; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:262. 1885: Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:103. 1873. Omega origi- 
nated with Laxton about 1872 from a Veitch Perfection x Ne Plus 
Ultra cross. It was listed in America in 1873. and was tested here 
in 1884. It was essentially a dwarf Ne Plus Ultra growing 2 to 3 
feet high, a few days later and with less blunt-ended pods. It was 
prolific, and the pods kept fresh well after picking. 

Hogg mentions a Progress pea, also Laxton's, from the same 
parents as Omega, which was a day or so earlier and had smaller 
pods, but was in every other way similar to it. This is not the Prog- 
ress pea recently introduced by Laxton Brothers. 



than the original Knight's variety, and much more productive, 
ripening over a long season. 

Fairhead Excelsior. Refs. 28; Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:107. 
1873. This pea is credited to Fairhead, before 1859. In 1860 it 
was pronounced identical with Climax by a committee of the Royal 
Horticultural Society; but was probably, like Napoleon, distinct 
in origin tho horticulturally indistinguishable from Climax. Hogg 
considers it synonymous only. It was brought to America in 1862 
and found decidedly early, taller than Climax or Napoleon, and a 
poor producer of very good peas. 

Popular. Refs. 30; Thorburn Cat. 1873; Hogg Gard. Yr. 
Bk. 11:107. 1873. Popular originated with Laxton, about 1871, 
but was distributed by Hurst. It reached America in 1873; but 
here never justified its name. 

It was apparently much like Champion of England, rather 
slender, earlier and more productive, light green, with long, rather 
narrow pods, much curved, pointed, and well filled with large peas. 
Hogg considered it better than Climax. 

Commander in Chief Refs. 31; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:248. 
1885 was introduced about 1875 by Carter and was brought to 
America two years later. It was grown at this Station in 1882 and 
1884, but never became widely known. 

From the descriptions given. Commander in Chief can hardly 
be separated from Champion of England; but was probably less 
branched at midstem, with rather deeper green foliage; pods usually 
single, slightly curved, and better filled with smaller peas, changing to 
rather small seeds with a bluish shade in the cream or light green 
coats. It was not as prolific as Champion but otherwise similar in 
cropping habits. 

Kelvedonian Refs. 32; Veitch, J. Car. 1907 originated prior 
to 1903, probably with Hurst. English references to the pea are 
few, but it was listed by two or more seedsmen for at least 20 years. 
The 1903 reference is an American one, and the variety was tested 
quite extensively in this country but never much grown. 

It was of dwarf Champion of England type, 2 J^ to 3 1 / 2 feet tall 
in America and somewhat taller abroad; pods paired, starting 
rather low on the stems, 11th or 12th node, longer and broader than 
those of Champion, straight, and square ended. It was rather 
earlier than Champion and decidedly more productive. 

Scotch Champion (Refs. 33; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:7. 1905) 
is placed in this group by the name. It was said to be new in 
America in 1907, but was grown in U. S. Department of Agriculture 
tests in South Dakota in 1904. It is a cross between Windsor 
Castle Marrowfat and Dr. McLean, and is very popular in Scotland 
and Ireland; so it is undoubtedly an old variety. It may be Cham 
pion of Scotland, described under Wrinkled, Cream-seeded Group. 

It was 3 to 3 ' 3 feet tall, very prolific, with " stout " pods 
4 inches long, ready in late midseason; peas about 6, of medium size, 
good color and flavor, medium in sweetness and juiciness. 

NE PLUS ULTRA GROUP 

Laxton Connoisseur (Refs. 23; Rural N. Y. 34:174. 1875). 
which seems to be distinct from the Cooper-Taber Connoisseur 
listed by Ferry, originated with Laxton about 1874 from a cross 
between Ne Plus Ultra and Evergreen. It was evidently very 
much like Ne Plus Ultra, but with rather smaller, slightly more 
curved pods, keeping in season longer, and with smaller, deep green 
seeds. 

Little Wonder (Refs. 24; Gregory Car. 1878> was introduced 
in England in 1878 by Carter, with whom it undoubtedly originated, 
and Gregory listed it in America in the same year. 

As described, and as grown here in 1884, it was a dwarfer, 
earlier and better podded G. F. Wilson. It is distinct from 
Loudon's Little Wonder, which was under 1 foot in height and 
bore small, white, round peas. This latter was probably never 
grown in America. 

Paragon. Refs. 18; Gregory Cat. 1894. Dickson's New 
Paragon was considered, in 1866, the same as Veitch Perfection, 
previously described. 

Under a rather different name, Hogg says plants resembled 
those of Bishop Early Dwarf, 2 to 2 J 2 feet tall, robust, branching, 
bearing many fine, deep green pods, filling poorly, in season with 
Paradise Marrow and Bishop Long-podded. 

Sharpe Paragon, or Early Paragon, originated with Culver- 



108 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



well, and was introduced about 1882 by Sharpe. It reached Amer- 
ica in 1885 and was grown at this Station in 1888. 

It was very much like Ne Plus Ultra, but earlier; with pods 
appearing plumper, but inflated ("puffy"), so the peas were no 
larger nor were they compressed. English descriptions say the 
pods were 2 or 3 in a group: but in the Station test they were " not 
numerous," and were borne high on the stems. (See Magnificent, 
described beyond.) 

In 1894, 1895 and 1896 several American seedsmen listed a 
Paragon pea, said to have been introduced by Grenell, and to be 
new; but the descriptions given are too fragmentary to say that this 
was not a reintroduction of Sharpe Paragon. If they were different, 
the American variety, of unknown parentage or breeding, was rather 
shorter stemmed; with stockier, almost cylindrical, better filled, 
blunt-ended pods, and more productive. 

At least two other Paragon peas are recorded in English pea 
literature and two more, of field pea type, in America. 

Perpetual Bearing iRefs. 30-33 \ probably better known as 
Walker Perpetual, was selected from Veitch Perfection by Walker, 
and distributed by Nutting about 1881. It is called a white-seeded 
Veitch Perfection, and said apparently to reproduce Premier. As 
Latest of All was called a selection from Premier, it is evident that 
the two continuous bearers were very similar; but our comparisons 
of the two varieties show Latest of All rather better, having larger 
pods and peas, better colored and with more green specimens among 
the seeds. The pods of Perpetual Bearing were more often curved, 
like those of Premier. 

Eckford Perpetual (Ne Plus Ultra x William U, introduced 
about 1883 and said to be superior to Perpetual Bearing, probably 
never reached the United States; nor did a Perpetual Bearer sent 
to the Royal Horticultural Society by Barr and given XXX in 1917, 
unless this is an improved form of the Walker pea, from which it 
differs in greater height, longer pods, and earlier bearing. It ripened 
too early to be included in the late pea group. 

Magnificent. Refs. 34; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:1905; Port- 
land Seed Co. Cat. 1909. This Magnificent originated with Eck- 
ford before 1883, as a Telephone x Ne Plus Ultra cross. It received 
a First Class Certificate from the Royal Horticultural Society in 
1884. English references say it is only slightly different from Sharpe 
Paragon, being later, and with square-tipped pods. These points, 
with its rather shorter pods, place it in this group rather than with 
the Telephones. It was tried in South Dakota in U. S. Department 
of Agriculture tests in 1904, and introduced in the West in 1909. 
Seed from which it was grown here, recently, came from the Idaho 
Station. Since it was not possible to secure an accurate description of 
Paragon, it may be well to give the leading characteristics of Mag- 
nificent, especially those which separate it from Ne Plus Ultra, as both 
were grown here in the same seasons from seed from the same sources. 

Height of Magnificent, 3 feet Ne Plus Ultra 4 1 2 l . with short 
internodes and more basal branches; foliage dense and dark green 
with bluish tinge from heavy bloom on stipules, leaflets in 4s, almost 
never in 5s, and larger, stipules larger, more whitened and more 
glaucous; pods begin rather higher on the stems, very rarely paired, 
slightly longer and more uniform, generally above 3}^ inches, 
occasionally slightly curved, better filled to the more abrupt ends; 
very dark green and very heavy- walled; peas averaging one more, 
4 to 7 or 8, dark green, very smooth, long oval in shape, and 
occasionally indented by compression; seed differences very slight, 
tho Magnificent varied more in wrinkling, from almost smooth to 
well wrinkled. Season and productivity of the two varieties were 
similar, late and moderately productive. 

The Magnificent pea, raised by W. Johnson, and tested at 
Wisley in 1922 and 1926, when it was given " H. C," is unknown 
in America. 

Sander Marrow. Refs. 35; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:137. 1889; 
Kans. Sta. Rpt. 2:165. 1890. This pea originated with Sander 
about 1883, and came to the United States for testing in 1888 and 
commercially in 1892. It was popular for a time in both England 
and America, but has now disappeared. 

Height 4 to 5 feet or more, rank in growth but rather short- 
jointed, much branched above, foliage large, coarse, light green 
marbled with white; leaflets 2-6, broad, obtuse, faintly toothed; 
subject to mildew: pods borne toward top of stem, sometimes paired, 
3 to 3J4 inches long, straight, blunt-ended, paler than foliage: peas 
3 to 5, huge, of fine quality, month later than earliest kinds. 



Anticipation iRefs. 37, 38; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:331. 1888) 
was introduced by Carter before 1886, and is said to come from a 
cross between Ne Plus Ultra and an early, wrinkled, dwarf pea. It 
was tested at various American stations, including this one, between 
1887 and 1894, was " condemned with faint praise," and apparently 
never regularly cataloged here. 

From the partial descriptions given, it was quite dwarf, occa- 
sionally 4 feet, stout-stemmed, sometimes branched, with light green 
or bluish green foliage, and paired pods, 3 to 4 inches long, straight, 
broad, with blunt ends, light in color, and containing 4 to 8 large, 
oval, medium green peas of excellent quality. It was apparently a 
little earlier than Ne Plus Ultra, and fairly productive. 

American Beauty (Ref. 39) probably originated with 
Alexander, by whom it was sent to this Station for testing in 1887. 
Descriptive notes are meager but it evidently is much like Anticipa- 
tion, with the pods somewhat constricted between peas, large and 
less blunt, even when well filled, than others of the group. 

The Don (Refs. 40; Mich. Sta. Bui. 79:21. 1892 1, origi- 
nated by Eckford, was sent, as Quality, to the Royal Horticultural 
Society for testing in 1888, received a First Class Certificate, was 
renamed, and was introduced the next year. It was brought to 
America in 1891. Tho a good pea, it was never widely known or 
grown on either side of the Atlantic. The brief descriptive notes 
do not give enough characteristics to separate it from Ne Plus Ultra 
or others of the group; but it was said to fill a vacancy in the season, 
coming between the second early and main crop varieties. 

Sutton Matchless (Ref. 41 i received a Certificate of Merit 
from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1890, and the old or an im- 
proved form was several times after that mentioned in their Journal, 
but does not seem to have been much grown. Probably grown in 
the United States only in tests of the U. S. Department of Agricul- 
ture and of this Station, in the latter from British Columbia seed. 

More dwarf than Ne Plus Ultra, 2 to 2 3 4 feet; stem stouter; 
foliage dense, medium green, consisting of very large leaflets and 
stipules, considerably whitened and the latter with heavy bloom; 
pods from 14th or 15th node, occasionally paired; almost like those 
of Ne Plus Ultra in size and shape, usually not well filled and with 
rather less blunt ends; peas 4 to 6, large, oval to oblong, whitish 
green, seeds decidedly larger than those of Ne Plus Ultra, about 75 
to the ounce, very broad oval and much flattened. Season and 
yields were about like those of the type variety. 

Apparently not Matchless Marrowfat of Sutton, from which 
name Marrowfat was later dropped (p. 100 i. 

Chelsonian Ref. 42 1 probably originated about 1890 with 
Jas. Veitch; did not gain special commendation from the Royal 
Horticultural Society when first shown, but later was said to be 
an early, selected form of Ne Plus Ultra with all the latter's good 
qualities. It was not very popular; and was never in commerce in 
the United States but was grown at the University of British Colum- 
bia and at this Station from British Columbia seed. 

Here, taller than Ne Plus Ultra, 5 feet; foliage darker, with 
leaflets occasionally in 3s only; flowers higher up the stem; pods were 
flatter, poorly filled, occasionally having only 2 peas and rarely 
more than 6 ; both pods and peas of good color and peas of excellent 
quality; the seeds very attractive, — mostly bright deep cream with 
some green shading. It was neither earlier nor more productive, 
under our conditions, than the older variety. 

GoldfniuVr Ref. 44) originated with R. Veitch before 1894; 
was grown many times in the gardens of the Royal Horticultural 
Society, but until 1925, when " highly commended," was evidently 
regarded as too similar to Ne Plus Ultra to merit a separate com- 
mendatory award. So far as known, it has been grown in America 
only in the U. S. Department of Agriculture tests, and at this 
Station from English seed. 

It differed from Ne Plus Ultra in greater vigor, stouter stem, 
darker foliage, pods more uniform and averaging larger, plumper, 
very blunt at the ends, and much better filled, usually with 7 peas, 
almost square thru compression, and of very fine quality. A few 
pods were ready much earlier than those on Ne Plus Ultra, but a 
long time was needed to secure the good to very good crops. 

Grant Favorite Refs. 45, 46 1 was introduced by Buckbee 
about 1894; and probably listed only by that firm. 

As grown here, a dwarfer Ne Plus Ultra, 2' o to 3 feet tall: 
stems rather stout, somewhat branched; foliage dark, slightly whit- 
ened and somewhat glaucous; pods occasionally paired, from 14th 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



109 



or 15th node, quite uneven in length, 3 to 4 inches, not well filled 
and rounded rather than blunt at the ends; peas 6, large, almost 
square thru compression, dark green in color and of good quality. 
The variety is about the same in season as Ne Plus Ultra and only 
fair to good in yields. It is also now quite variant in type, probably 
through lack of sufficient care in growing the seed. Some older 
records indicate an earlier season and greater productivity. 

\\ imm! \iiiu-. Ref. 47. Acme was introduced in 1895 by 
Wood 8s Sons, and apparently has been listed only by them. From 
the descriptions and data given it was probably of Ne Plus Ultra 
type; and in a West Virginia Station test was heaviest in total yield 
and second in yield per plant of 35 varieties grown. There it was 
2- feet tall, and ready in midseason. This is distinct from the 
Wisconsin Station canners' pea, Acme. 

Late Queen iRef. 48 was introduced by Sutton in 1895, as 
superior to Latest of All. Probably not handled commercially in 
the United States but was grown in our recent tests from British 
Columbia and English seeds. It proved, here, a dwarfer, larger 
podded Ne Plus Ultra, not noticeably later than that variety. 

(apt. Cuttle. Refs. 49; Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 4X:91. 
1923; Leonard Cat. 1913. Capt. Cuttle was raised by Holmes 
before 1897, when the variety received an Award of Merit from the 
Royal Horticultural Society. It has been considerably grown in 
England, even recently; and was introduced into the United States 
in 1913 but did not gain a permanent place. Capt. Cuttle was 
tested by the U. S. Department of Agriculture in 1904 before its 
introduction, and again in their recent tests, from which seed was 
secured for growth at this Station, in 1926. English comparisons 
associate Capt. Cuttle with Duke of Albany; but in our tests the 
pods were much more like those of Ne Plus Ultra, having rounded to 
blunt ends, tho they sometimes lack the distinct tip which character- 
izes that variety. 

Plants nearly a foot shorter than those of Ne Plus Ultra, 2 3 ± 
to 3 3 4 feet; stems stouter, usually unbranched; foliage abundant, 
fairly dark, consisting of very large, slightly glaucous but not 
whitened leaflets in 5s and 6s, and still larger stipules, decidedly 
whitened and quite glaucous; flowers very large, white, with green 
at the base, from 15th node, more frequently paired than single, on 
rather short, heavy peduncles; pods appear somewhat slenderer 
than those of Ne Plus Ultra, but average rather longer, 3J<^ to 4 
inches, generally quite well filled; peas averaging 5 or 6 from 8 
ovules; large, round to indented, short, oval, dark green in color and 
of very good quality, tho slightly mealy; seeds much like those of 
Non Plus Ultra, the recent improved type of Ne Plus Ultra, but have 
a distinct bluish shade, especially noticeable in the cream colored 
ones. The season is about that of Ne Plus Ultra, but the crop was 
very much better. 

Continuity Ref. 50) was introduced in 1898 by Sutton, but 
has never been used in the United States, tho grown recently in 
our tests, from British Columbia seed. 

It is evidently a variant pea, especially in stem length, since 
English references give the height as from 3 to 6 feet, and in our 
tests the plants were but little more than a foot tall. Except for 
the height, it is of Ne Plus Ultra type and of about the same season. 
It is said to bear heavy crops under normal conditions. 

Reliance 'Refs. 51: Henderson Cat. 1901; was intro- 
duced by Hurst about 1898, came to America in 1901, and seems to 
have become as well, or better, known here than in England, tho 
not especially popular in either country. It was still listed in 
England in 1925; but not found in recent American catalogs, so 
was not included in our tests. 

MINOR VARIETIES IN 

Invincible. Refs. 10-13; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:138. 1889. I 
Sharpe Invincible was a Veitch Perfection x Essex Rival cross, orig- 
inating previous to 1878 with Culverwell, introduced in that year 
by Sharpe, tested at this Station in 1888 and sold in the United 
States in 1889, but was probably never widely grown. 

Smaller in every way than Telephone, 3 to Z\4 feet tall; pods 
similar in shape or slightly more slender, half an inch shorter: peas 
as many, or more, smaller: seeds greener. As the pods were often 
paired and occasionally in threes it was more prolific than Telephone, 
and was earlier. It could not compete with Telephone in popularity 
because of the latter's showy pods. 

Sutton Invincible, introduced in 1893, was another Culverwell 
cross-bred pea originating in 1884. Probably not distributed corn- 



It appears to have been an especially vigorous, hardy, mildew- 
resistant, rather early strain of Ne Plus Ultra, with shorter, better 
filled, somewhat wrinkled pods. The foliage was light green in 
color, and the pods medium, or " fresh," green. 

Prime of Peas 'Refs. 53; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:7. 1905 
originated with Culverwell, and was introduced in 1899 by Sutton. 
It was said to be of Duke of Albany type, but distinct: and the blunt- 
ended pods, in the opinion of the Royal Horticultural Society 
Committee, classed it as an improved Ne Plus Ultra. It has been 
grown in the United States, so far as known, only in the U. S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture tests. 

Midseason variety, with 10 or more 3} 2-inch pods to the vine, 
each with 5 to 7 large, oval peas of good flavor and texture but 
medium in color and sweetness. English references make it about 
as tall-stemmed as Ne Plus Ultra, earlier in season, and a better 
producer of larger pods and peas, not of specially good color. 

Lord Roberts Refs. 54; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:7. 1905) was 
introduced by Sutton in 1902; and has probably been grown in the 
United States only in tests. 

It is 2 to 3 feet tall, with habit like that of Stratagem; but the 
handsome, long, massive, broad, almost straight, dark green pods 
with square ends are those of Ne Plus Ultra. It is a late midseason 
pea, and quite productive, even in America. 

Censor Ref. 55 originated with Eckford before 1906. Altho 
it received " full marks " from the Royal Horticultural Society, 
it never gained a noteworthy place in England; and is unknown in 
the United States except in tests of the U. S. Department of Agri- 
culture and this Station. 

It resembles Capt. Cuttle, but is shorter stemmed, 2 feet, 
with lighter colored foliage, leaflets in 4s and smaller, similar large 
flowers borne two or three nodes lower, and with pods less often 
paired. The pods are very similar to those of Capt. Cuttle, possibly 
more often with a slight curve and usually longer rounded at the ends 
which results from a slight lessening of the average number of peas. 
The peas are of the same color and size, but the seeds are more 
flattened. The season of the two peas is apparently the same, but 
Censor did not yield as well. 

Maryland Pride l,Ref. 59 1 was introduced in 1909 by Griffith 
& Turner and they, alone, seem to list it. It was grown at this 
Station in our recent tests; and was very much like Thomas Laxton. 

Pods of Maryland Pride were not quite so blunt at the ends, 
and the larger, darker green peas wrinkled so much in ripening that 
they weighed a trifle less than those of Thos. Laxton. If there was 
any difference in season, Maryland Pride was a day or so earlier; 
both gave good crops. 

Loiigstander Ref. 61 was introduced by Sutton in 1913, 
and was grown here from British Columbia seed. Our test was not 
very satisfactory because of late planting and long season required 
for maturing pods, 75 days from planting on May 22nd: but the 
data secured agreed, as well as could be expected under our condi- 
tions, with Sutton's description: 

Follows Ne Plus Ultra in season, and of same type, 6 feet 
tall, with larger and broader pods of fine dark color. 

Dreadnought Refs. 60; Allen, Sterling & Lothrop Car. 
1913 1 was introduced by Carter shortly before 1910, and was brought 
to America in 1913. It is still listed and said to be very popular in 
northern England. 

Height, 3 feet; foliage rather scanty, dark green, pods paired, 
of similar color, from 3 to 4 inches long, of Ne Plus Ultra type, but 
with a distinct, incurved notch on the dorsum just back of the tip; 
peas 6, large, dark green, of " delicious flavor;" seeds well wrinkled. 
It was a late but quite productiv e variety. 

TELEPHONE GROUP 

mercially in the United States, but it has been grown at this Station 
for three years from British Columbia seed. 

Very like Telephone in all important characters but height, 
only 2 '4 to 234 feet; foliage finer; leaflets and stipules both small; 
average pods not quite as long, nor as plump, and of poor color, 
being decidedly whitish. Somewhat later than Telephone, about 
second midseason, and possibly produces more pods. 

Queen iRef. 18 originated in Wisconsin before 1884. It is a 
Telephone -type pea. 

About 5 feet tall, with paired pods, rather short for the type, 
ready in 73 days from sowing made April 25, yielding well and giving 
a large percentage, by weight to pod weight, of peas which remained 
bright, lively green when cooked, sweet and tender. 



110 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Duchess. Refs. 23-25: Mich. Sta. Bui 70:15. 1891: Far- 
quhar Cat. 1911. Duchess originated with Abbott, and was intro- 
duced by him in 1887. It was a Duke of Albany x Veitch Perfection 
cross. It was so similar to Duke of Albany that the name is often 
considered merely a synonym of the early variety. Abbott con- 
sidered it quite distinct, its dark green, paired pods, with beautiful 
bloom, and its earliness, making it better than Duke of Albany; 
and it received the only First Class Certificate given peas by the 
Royal Horticultural Society in 1888. It was tested in America 
in 1890 and 1903 and listed commercially in 1911 but seems not to 
have displaced Telephone or Duke of Albany. 

American Champion Ref. 26 is seemingly Duke of Albany 
introduced under the changed name in 1887 by Henderson, just as 
Gradus became Henderson's Prosperity. 

As grown here in 1887 and 1888 it was considered the same as 
Telephone, or Telegraph with wrinkled peas; and from our recent 
trials its description checks almost point for point with that of Duke 
of Albany, tho the Champion strain seemed to have a few branches, 
rather smaller stipules, and slightly shorter pods. A general note 
said. " Telephone type, but pods and peas greener." 

Midsummer (Refs. 27, 281 appears to be an American pea, 
as Daniels' Midsummer Marrow, an English pea, is too dwarf and 
too early to meet the descriptions of Henderson's Midsummer. 
The latter was introduced in 1888, was tested at various stations, 
including this one, and appears to have found some favor. 

The earlier descriptions of Midsummer make it heavy-stem- 
med, dark foliaged, about 3 feet tall, with paired pods, paler than 
foliage, slightly recurved, 2 or 3 inches long, blunt-ended; produc- 
tive; late. These characters would exclude it from the Telephone 
group. 

As grown here recently, Lohrmann's Midsummer differed, in 
some respects, not only from Henderson's Midsummer but from 
Lohrmann's own catalog description. 

Plants from one lot of seeds varied greatly, but were similar to 
short Telephones, while those from a second lot were much taller 
and more branched; foliage of both strains darker than that of 
Telephone, and often with only two leaflets; pods of Telephone type, 
but short, and each with a distinct, small recurved tip, which Tele- 
phone pods lack, and more curved at the point than those of the old 
Telephone. 

The better strain was certainly of the Telephone type; so 
both Midsummers are included in the group. 

Duke of Edinburg (Ref. 33 I was tested at this Station in 
1891. It appears to have been a rather short-podded, very prolific 
Telephone. 

Colossus (Refs. 34; Northrup, King & Co. Car. 19131 origi- 
nated with Eckford, the noted English sweet pea breeder, prior to 
1891, but was not listed in America until 1913. Quite popular in 
France. It was grown here during three recent seasons. 

A rather tall, slightly branched Telephone, flowering at about 
the 17th node (12th in France i and producing beautiful 4 to 5-inch 
pods, darker in color than Telephone, not always well filled, but 
averaging more peas to the pod and yielding as well, sometimes 
better, tho not as heavily as the best of the group. 

Empress of India (Ref. 37) was a contribution to the 
Telephone group by Sutton about 1892, from a Sangster No. 1 x 
Telephone cross. Grown in the United States experimentally at 
South Dakota Station in 1903 and here in 1922-24 from British 
Columbia seed. 

The Sangster influence apparently shortened the stem and 
pods and lightened the foliage, pods and peas; flowers much lower 
on the stem, 9th to 10th node; pods more cylindrical than those of 
Telephone; peas fewer in number and smaller; crops better. 

Sutton Exhibition Marrowfat. Refs. 38; Farquhar Car. 
1910. This Sutton pea, introduced about the same time as Empress 
of India, is very similar to Telephone, hardly separable from it by 
any descriptions given, but as grown here, more closely resembling 
Duke of Albany in pods, these being even larger and with peas of 
as good or better quality. Our seed came from British Columbia. 

It was several years in reaching America, 1910, and has never 
been widely grown. It is distinct from Veitch Exhibition Marrow- 
fat, Carter's Exhibition, and Salzer's Giant Exhibition. 

Epicure (Ref. 39 , a tall pea of the Telephone class, was put 
out by Eckford in 1893 and received high commendation by the 
Royal Horticultural Society-. References without descriptions in 



American periodicals after 1895 may have been to this pea, but more 
probably to Early Epicure, a very dwarf, short-podded pea of the 
Gem type. 

Eckford's Epicure grew 5 or 6 feet tall, having very large, 
deep green, pointed pods, containing 9 to 12 peas of high quality, 
ready in late midseason, retaining their deep green color in cooking; 
seeds deep green, wrinkled. 

Goliath. Refs. 40-42; Simon Car. 1913, also letter from 
Simon, March 9, 1927. Cooper-Taber found in 1884, in a sowing of 
Telegraph, the original plant of Goliath, introduced in 1886. It 
was listed in the United States in 1913, but never much grown. 
It may belong here or with the dimpled-seeded group, one reference 
classing it as " a round-seeded form of Telephone, distinct from 
Telegraph;" and another saying " seeds wrinkled." 

Plants of the same height as Telephone, more robust and more 
often branched: pods larger and more numerous; peas larger and 
more wrinkled than those of Telegraph, rounder than those of 
Telephone. The season was the same. 

The Simon letter says their Goliath was supposed to be an 
improved strain of Alderman, with larger pods, but less prolific. 
As grown here these characters were exactly reversed. The peas, 
however, were very large, and the mixed cream and green seeds 
quite well wrinkled. 

Magnum Bonum Marrowfat Refs. 43: Tait Car. 1922 
was introduced by Sutton in 1893 as a useful, productive maincrop 
pea, much like Exhibition Marrowfat. It is also a good exhibition 
variety. 

Pods long, straight, broad, long-rounded, of finest form and 
color, with dense bloom: peas 8 or 9. large, of excellent quality. Pod 
shape places the variety in the Telephone group, rather than in the 
Ne Plus Ultra or Stratagem groups with the other Magnum Bonums. 

It is undoubtedly this pea, rather than older Magnum Bonum 
that Tait has reintroduced, as shown by the pods in our tests, 
although the plants are rather tall 5 feet ) for Magnum Bonum 
Marrowfat, which is said to be 3 to 4} o feet tall only. 

Peerless Marrowfat. Refs. 45, 46; Farquhar Car. 1909. 
Peerless Marrowfat was introduced in 1895 by Sutton. It was very 
slow in reaching America, and has never been much listed here. 
Seeds of a Peerless were received at this Station from British 
Columbia; but the pods produced were apparently too blunt to 
correspond to descriptions of Peerless Marrowfat, and Peerless 
Marrowfat was rather early midseason while Peerless required 10 
weeks to first pods, even from late sowing. The varieties agreed 
in other characters. 

Peerless Marrowfat is a good, maincrop variety, much shorter 
in stem than Telephone, 2 1 2 to 3 feet ; pods almost as long, of similar 
shape, generally paired; peas 8 to 10, large, dark green; seeds large, 
blue green, wrinkled. 

Prizewinner iRefs. 47; Burpee Cat. 19101 was introduced in 
1896 by Sutton and reached the United States in 1910. Almost as 
dwarf as Gradus and Laxtonian, it is otherwise similar to members 
of the Telephone group. 

Height, 3, 3 > 2, under some conditions, 4' 2 feet: stem, foliage, 
and pods dark green: pods paired under good culture, long, broad, 
straight, peas 8 or 9, large, deep green, finely flavored. Second 
early and bears heavily. As grown here exceedingly like Boston 
Unrivaled, 1 ' 2 feet shorter, and with slightly darker, better filled 
pods. Neither gave good crops, but Boston Unrivaled slightly 
better. Neither seems adapted to our climate. 

Hobbies Prizewinner, listed by Hobbies in 1912, appears to 
be a taller selection of this variety, with very long, plump, curved 
pods. 

Phonograph Ref. 48 1 is unknown except as listed as new by 
Landreth in 1896, and described as like Telephone in general 
characters but very productive, with very showy, straight, large, 
distended, sometimes saddle-backed, pods containing 6 to 9 most 
delicious peas. It is quite distinct from the Phonograph tested at 
the South Dakota Station in 1903-4. 

Enormous Ref. 49 was offered about 1899 as " No. 4 " by 
Mills, and was given its name as the result of a prize competition. 
Little detailed description is given, but illustrations of the pods 
place it in the Telephone group. 

As grown here, recently, however, except for a distinct broaden- 
ing of the pods at the tip, it would be classed with Magnum Bonum. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



111 



the pods being much more rounded at the tip than as shown in the 
catalogs. Except for this slight pod difference Enormous would be 
called a finer type of improved Telephone, with better colored peas, 
much more productive, but possibly a little later. 

Monarch Refs. 50, 51) appears to have been introduced, or 
improved, by Sharpe about 1900, when given an Award of Merit by 
the Royal Horticultural Society, and was grown in South Dakota 
in 1904. Of Duke of Albany type, about 4 feet tall, and " one of the 
best yielding peas in existence." 

Sutton Perpetual Ref. 52 '. introduced in 1889, is entirely 
distinct from Walker's Perpetual Bearer, a much older pea of the 
Ne Plus Ultra group, and does not appear to have come to America. 

Pods paired, of Telephone size and shape, but broadening 
gradually from neck to tip, which is usually slanted dorsally as well 
as ventrally; handsome in appearance, good green in color, but 
wrinkle early. Height 2 ' 2 to 4 feet, branched at base and above: 
flowers from 12th to 14th node: it begins maturing a little later than 
Telephone and bears for a long time, being quite resistant to mildew. 

Kouuh Kider Ref. 53 was a selected Telephone introduced 
by Salzer in 1902: and, according to a letter from that firm dated 
Nov. 20. 1926, was discarded in favor of Alderman. Its height was 
given as 2 ' 2 feet. 

Centenary Marrowfat tRefs. 54, 55) was listed in Sutton's 
1900 catalog but in some later ones the name was shortened to 
Centenary. Seed of the variety under this name came to us from 
British Columbia, but Centenary Marrowfat was the name on the 
packet of seeds from this source that later produced a pea quite 
similar in many respects to Eckford Centenary, yet hardly indenti- 
fiable as that variety. 

As grown here Sutton's Centenary Marrowfat was of very good 
Telephone type, branched both at ground and above; pods begin- 
ning at 16th node, occasionally paired, 4 to 4" s inches long, broad, 
oval or flat in cross section, with heavy, wrinkled walls, not plump, 
fairly well colored; peas 6—7, large, dark green. It was nearly a week 
later than Telephone and more productive. The variety from the 
other packet of British Columbia seeds resembled the one just 
described in vine characters though not as tall and with broader 
leaflets and much larger stipules; but the pods were more than half 
an inch shorter, of similar shape but appearing broader because of 
the diminished length, and contained fewer and smaller peas. It 
did not give as good crops as Telephone. 

Eckford Centenary, listed as new in 1906 by Eckford, was called 
an excellent maincrop variety, 3 feet tall, and illustrations showed 
long pods, smoother and more curved than those of Telephone. 

Sharpe Standard (Ref. 56) originated with Sharpe before 
1900, when it received an Award of Merit from the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society. Rarely listed in America. Said to have been of 
Alderman type, but superior in every way to that variety. 

As grown at McMillan, Mich., in U. S. Department of Agri- 
culture tests: Height 4 to 4 J 2 feet; stem very smooth, light colored, 
almost round below, with few branches; leaflets and stipules very 
large, medium green, but much whitened and with wide white veins; 
flowers begain at the 14th or 15th node, very large with faint pinkish 
flush; pods on long rigid stalks, 3 3 4 to 4 inches long, broad, straight 
with long-rounded ends and usually a dorsal slant, bringing the 
small tip near the center; peas about 9, large. Ready for picking in 
midseason and crop good to very good. 

Sutton Masterpiece. Refs. 57; S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:7. 
1905; Farquhar Car. 1911. This Masterpiece, originated by Sutton 
in 1901. was grown in a test at the South Dakota Station in 1904 
and listed commercially in the United States in 1911. 

It is a robust, maincrop pea, 2}/% to 3J/2 feet tall, with dark 
green foliage and pods; latter usually paired, long, broad, straight, 
with long rounded or pointed, tipless ends, rather coarsely wrinkled 
at picking time; peas 7 or more, large, dark green. In the South 
Dakota test the peas cooked quickly, were soft, of good color and 
flavor, and moderately juicy and sweet. 

Teddy Roosevelt Refs. 60, 61. 621, introduced or renamed 
by Northrup, is Duke of Albany, or a selection from it. 

As grown here, only the slightest, unimportant differences 
could be seen. No evidence was found to support the introducer's 
claim that it " shells out almost twice as many peas as Telephone " 
to a bushel of pods. It bloomed and podded somewhat more freely 
than Telephone, and the pods were darker in color. 

Summer Queen (Ref. 63 1 was listed by Wood, Stubbs & Co. 
as early as 1901, and was still carried by them in 1926, tho not listed 
by others. 



They give the height, at various times, 2 '2 and 3'o feet; but 
in our tests, from the firm's seed, it was 5 feet; more branched than 
Telephone; foliage scantier, lighter colored, very coarse, with round- 
tipped, lightly clasping stipules; tendrils slender; flowers rather few, 
began high on the stem; pods Telephone-like, not broad nor as well 
filled; peas rather smaller than those of Telephone and less uniform 
in shape, occasionally quite irregular. Decidedly earlier in season 
than Telephone, but not a good cropper. 

Exhibition Refs. 64, 65 1 was sent to the Royal Horticultural 
Society for testing in 1908 by Carter; and in 1908, Vaughan listed as 
new Vaughan's Best Exhibition, which by comparison of descrip- 
tions seems to be very similar to Carter's pea, if not identical with 
it. Carter received an Award of Merit for Exhibition in 1910, but 
such commendation was denied in 1918. 

The variety was as late, if not later than Telephone, taller, 
with darker, 5-inch pods, sometimes paired, of Telephone shape. 
Vaughan says " unusually productive " and " pods really giants." 

Premier. Ref. 68. Among various Premier peas, none was 
listed in American catalogs when our tests began in 1922, but seed 
of one variety came to us from the Idaho Station of whose identity 
we are not quite certain, as it differs in one or more characteristic 
points from McLean's, Eckford's, or Nellis' Premier. It corre- 
sponds, to some extent, to a Premier sent to the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society for testing in 1911, by Bell & Bieberstedt, but not 
enough details are given in the descriptions of that pea to say whether 
or not the two are identical. 

As grown here it was a Telephone pea of very good type, much 
like Prince Edward. Height 3 ' 2 to 4) 2 feet, considerably branched; 
foliage delicate dark green; pods large, dark green; peas large, long- 
oval, of fine color; seeds sown were smaller than any of the Telephone 
type except Empress of India, perhaps due to their growth in a dry 
season in Idaho, as the peas and crop seeds were large. It ranked 
with Telephone in productivity. 

Sutton Superlative (Ref. 69) was introduced by Sutton in 
1906, and probably not grown commercially in America. The 
stock we tested came from the trial plats of the Idaho Station. 

Quite dwarf and bushy for a Telephone pea, 2 3 4-3^ feet 
tall; branches many, at base and middle of the stem; stem slender, 
enlarging toward the top; foliage like that of Telephone; pods excel- 
lent examples of the type, of medium size, 3Jg to 4 3 s inches long, 
broad, moderately plump, quite uniform, of good color; peas 7 to 9, 
fair sized, dark green. It is distinctly later than Telephone and not 
a heavy bearer. 

Petoskey (Ref. 70) was listed in 1908 by Darling and consid- 
ered distinct from Telephone, Duke of Albany and Alderman, as 
all four varieties are listed together in some of this firm's catalogs. 
It seems to have been a selection from one of these : 

Productive, but late, with short (3j£-4 feet I, strong, " stocky " 
stems; abundant, coarse, light green foliage; and " immense," dark, 
rich-colored pods, filled to the ends. 

Harvestman (Ref. 71), an Express x Duke of Albany cross, 
was introduced by Carter before 1912. It is unknown in this 
country except thru non-commercial trials. It was grown here in 
1926, and seems a fine late Telephone, with large, medium green 
foliage and pods, and rather lighter colored peas. In England it 
was held superior to Duke of Albany but here hardly separable from 
it by description. Actual comparison was not made, since the two 
peas were not grown in the same season. 

Home Garden (Ref. 72) was cataloged in 1909 by Moore, 
and was dwarf. As grown here in recent years, from seed obtained 
from the introducers, it was a Telephone-type pea. 

Stems 4 to 5 feet long, very stout; branches few, medial; 
foliage very coarse, dark green but much whitened; pods hardly as 
large as those of the better peas of the group, but dark green in 
color, plump, very well filled; peas about 7, very large, compressed 
and indented, finely colored. It was later than Telephone, but 
giving a better total crop. 

A letter from the Moore Seed Co., Jan. 25, 1927, says the true 
Home Garden is dwarf, but that other peas vary greatly in height 
on different soils in the vicinity of Philadelphia, so Home Garden 
may be taller on heavy soils. Home Garden, as cataloged, would 
belong in the pointed pod section of Large-podded Dwarf peas. 

Golden King (Ref. 73) originated in Germany and was intro- 
duced into America in 1909 by Livingston. It reached England at 
about the same time. 



112 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



It was characterized by the uniform, shining, deep golden 
yellow color of the pods, each with a distinct band of green marking 
the dorsal suture. Otherwise it was of Telephone type, 4 to 4 Hi 
feet tall, with vigorous vines, covered with bright green foliage, 
and bearing, at the same season, a good crop of pods fully as long, 
broad and plump as those of Telephone. Except as a novelty in the 
home garden, the yellow of the pods was a defect; and the variety 
was not long grown. 

Top Notcher (Ref. 74) was announced by Schultz in 1910 as 
" comparatively new " and " one of the best of the Telephone type." 
It was probably Alderman. 

It was 5 feet high, vigorous, with dark green foliage and long, 
dark green, well-filled pods which retained their color long after 
shipping. 

Up-To-Date (Ref. 75) was another exhibition pea, introduced 
by Sutton in 1912; and never, so far as known, brought to America 
in a commercial way. 

It has been grown at the Station from seed from the originator 
and from the University of British Columbia, the two strains showing 
no characteristic differences. 

Pods slightly broader and smoother than those of Telephone, 
often poorly filled, sometimes decidedly " puffy," of about the same 
color; peas rather smaller, medium green. Later than Telephone 
and no better as a bearer. 

Gregory's catalog of 1897 has been misread to make Up-to- 
Date a synonym of Carter's Daisy; but the seedsman's intention 
was only to characterize Daisy as an " up-to-date " pea. 

Itt'll (Ref. 76) has been grown experimentally at McMillan, 
Mich., by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, and at this Station, 
but probably not introduced into America commercially. It was 
listed in 1912, perhaps earlier, by Dobbie, as a recently introduced, 
maincrop pea which they could recommend highly. 

In our tests, too dwarf for a typical Telephone, 2pi feet tall; 
leaflets large, quite often in 6s rather than in 4s, they and the stip- 
ules being distinctly bluish medium green in color, very glaucous but 
not whitened; flowers cream tinted, from the 10th node; pods often 
paired, on long, heavy stalks; slightly shorter and not quite as plump 
as those of Telephone, otherwise similar and of the same medium 
green color; peas averaged more than 6, smooth, round oval, 
quite large, not well colored; seeds mixed cream and green, well 
wrinkled. 

In spite of the pairing of the pods the yield was no better than 
that of Telephone, and somewhat later. 

Clipper (Ref. 77) probably originated with Sydenham about 
1913. As there is also an Alaska type Clipper, it is difficult to say 
which, if any, American listings of the name refer to this pea. 

Seed of it received at this Station in 1922 from the Idaho 
Station gave a short-stemmed pea of the Alderman type; pods 
decidedly longer, narrower; peas more numerous, smaller, rounder, 
dark green; seeds sown almost wholly cream colored, but those 
harvested nearly all good light green, larger and more wrinkled. 
It was in season with Telephone and gave similar yields. Clipper 
as grown here in 1926 from seed raised at McMillan, Mich., on the 
U. S. Department of Agriculture plats was not as tall and produced 
shorter, broader, pods, but was otherwise very similar to the strain 
previously grown. 

Dark Green Pixl (Ref. 78), under which name Haskell listed 
this pea in 1913, is probably Alderman, or a selection from it, as 
Alderman is not listed with other peas of the Telephone group 
offered, including Admiral Dewey, and the description corresponds 
very closely to that of Alderman in America. 

Market Gardener (Ref. 79) resulted from a cross between 
Early Morn and Duke of Albany, both Telephone-type peas, so is 
included here; altho its characteristics are not quite those of Tele- 
phone, differing mainly in the comparatively shorter, slenderer, 
and more curved Market Gardener pods. It was listed in England 
in 1913 by Carter who at that time also maintained an American 
branch and probably introduced the pea here about the same time. 
It apparently never gained a foothold with commercial growers. 

It was grown at the Station from two lots of seed, one from the 
introducer and one from the Idaho Station. These were alike, 
except that the Idaho Strain was four days earlier. 

The plants, 3j^ to 4 x /2 feet tall; pods from the 13th node; 
peas as many in pod as Telephone, smaller. American conditions 
did not favor Market Gardener; for it did not produce as heavily as 
Telephone in our tests. 



Full Crop (Ref. 80), listed by F. W. Bolgiano in 1913, was 
said to be like Telephone but more prolific and with larger, greener 
pods. This also may have been Alderman. 

Yankee Prince (Ref. 81), introduced by Simon in 1911, is 
probably Alderman. As grown at this Station, it differed only in 
very minor points from that variety; and both podded higher up on 
the stem than most peas of the group. 

William Richardson (Ref. 84) was sent by Nutting to the 
Royal Horticultural Society for testing in 1916 where it was highly 
commended, and it received a similar award in 1922. It has not, 
apparently, been in the United States commercially, but seed was 
received here from the Idaho Station. 

A good, short-stemmed pea of Telephone type, more uniform 
in size of pods tho these were slightly shorter, about 4 1 ± inches. 
The curving of the pods noted in English descriptions was not 
evident tho the tips were long-rounded, giving a somewhat curved 
appearance. Foliage, pods and peas were of decidedly better color 
than those of Telephone. It was several days later than Telephone, 
and no better cropper. 

It might probably, be better placed in the pointed pod section 
of the Large podded Dwarf group. 

Good Indeed (Ref. 82) was introduced by Kelway in 1915, 
and has been tested by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, and at 
this Station from Idaho Station seed, but has not been listed in the 
United States by any well-known seedsman. 

In our tests it proved a moderately tall-stemmed, branched 
pea of Telephone type, with quite uniform, medium green pods, 
3' s to 3 5 s inches long, slightly curved, quite well filled with large, 
round-oval, dark green peas. Season and crop were like those of 
Telephone. 

Late Gradus (Ref. 83) probably originated with Keeney, 
but was introduced in 1915 by Vaughan. It was said to be a special 
Gradus bred to fill a particular place and time, coming between the 
last of Gradus and the first of Telephone. 

With us, from Keeney seed, it seemed much like Telephone, 
slightly shorter, more branched, with larger, round tipped stipules; 
pods began higher on the stem, occasionally paired, a trifle longer 
and not as plump, or as well filled; seeds larger, and with more of 
green in the coat color. Almost as late as Telephone and similar 
in crop production, — good only. 

Lord Kitchener (Ref. 85) was introduced in 1916 by Sutton 
and said to be of Duchess of York type. It was grown here from 
British Columbia seed; but is apparently otherwise unknown in 
America. 

Much shorter than Telephone, but hardly dwarf enough to be 
classed with Laxtonian; pods of Telephone type and fully as large, 
with fewer peas, and not usually well filled. It is decidedly earlier 
than Telephone, but crops poorly under our conditions. 

Lord Leicester (Refs. 87; Jung Car. 1919 1 from a cross between 
Gradus and Stratagem, made by Laxton, was introduced by Harri- 
son (2), before 1917; and listed in America in 1919. It is of 
Alderman type, tho of quite different parentage. 

As grown at this Station: Much more dwarf than in English 
descriptions, 2 l i to 3 feet; stem stout, much branched; foliage 
abundant, dark green, of large, square-tipped leaflets and slightly 
larger, round-tipped stipules, both somewhat whitened; flowers 
from about the 10th node; pods only moderately long, 3 :i 4 to 4 '4 
inches, but broad, plump and better filled to the rounded ends than 
most of the type; peas 6 or 7, very large, of fine dark green color. 
It was about as early as any of the group and yielded very well, 
much better than Telephone. 

Aristocrat (Refs. 88, 89) was announced as his in 1919 by 
Jung, and said to be only 1 ' 3 to 1?2 feet tall; but as grown in our 
tests it was 3 to 3 ' 2 feet tall. This is only such difference in height 
as might be expected here, from that given in descriptions of an 
English Aristocrat, which seems otherwise similar to Jung's Aristo- 
crat. This English pea was introduced by Jas. Veitch in 1901. 

In our tests it was a rather short-stemmed, unbranched Tele- 
phone with long, very broad pods, slightly curved, well filled to 
the tip but not to the edge and rather light in color. It was late, 
even for Telephone, but bore much better crops. 

Longfellow. Refs. 90; letters from J. T. Moreland, Pres., 
Geo. Tait & Sons Co., Dec. 14, 1922, and from same company Jan. 
26, 1927. Longfellow was listed by Tait in 1918 under a descrip- 
tion previously used for Admiral Dewey. However, an early letter 
from the firm says Longfellow was from a cross between Alderman 




Very large stipules and prominent tendrils 



GOLDFINDER 



(Two-tbirds natural size) 













1 


J 


1 


J 


„ 


1 » 


1 1 


• 1 


< 


t J 


GOLDEN VINE 


CANADA FIELD 


BLUE PRUSSIAN 


DWARF WHITE SUGAR 


ALASKA 

i 

V 


• 


) 


J 


J 


3 


> 

VICTORIA MARROW 


* 

SANGSTER No. 1 


LARGE WHITE MARROWFAT 


i J 

SIMON FILLBASKET 


SUPERB 


J 


• 


) 




J 


*> 9 


m § 


# J 


- 


j > 


ACQUISITION 


SCIMETAR 


LIGHTNING 


ROYAL SALUTE 


PILOT 


3 


J 




• 


* 


STRATAGEM 


• 

HORAL 


J 3 

HORSFORD MARKET GARDEN 


• 9 

GREEN ADMIRAL 


• • 

THOMAS LAXTON 


4 


1 


• 


» 


■3 


3 

VICTORY 


) 

HUNDREDFOLD 


MAGNUM BONUM 


LITTLE GEM 


3 ,; J> 

ADVANCER 


i 


• 


4 


• 


• 


# 9 


D 


• • 


• 


^ ^ 


ALDERMAN 


LITTLE MARVEL 


LUSCIOUS 


GIANT SUGAR 


MUMMY 






TYPES OF PEA SEEDS 


Nearly natural sizeV 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



113 



and Duke of Albany and a later one that it was a selection from 
Sharpe Queen. There is very little difference between Longfellow, 
Duke of Albany. Admiral Dewey, and Alderman, but Longfellow 
was thought to have a trifle larger pods. 

As grown here, the average length of Longfellow pods was 
second to Duke of Albany, and greater than that of Admiral Dewey 
and Alderman grown the same seasons. The differences were 
minute, however, and might easily have been changed in direction 
by slight soil variations or by using larger or smaller numbers of 
pods for measurement. In another season and from a different lot 
of seed. Longfellow was shorter both in vine and in pod. 

About all that can be said for the four varieties named is that 
under similar conditions, they are all somewhat better peas than 
the original Telephone. 

Plentiful. Ref. 72. Seed of a Sutton's Plentiful pea from 
the University- of British Columbia was received at the Station in 
1922. Sutton's catalogs from 1896 to date do not list any Plenti- 
ful, but Hurst sent a pea so named to the Royal Horticultural Society 
in 1918. This, however, bore paired, curved pods of Senator type, 
while the British Columbia pea grown here is plainly of Telephone 
type, differing only in minor characters from that variety, later and 
less productive. The pods were of only medium length, very tough 
and leathery to the touch, not well filled, but of good color. 

Amateur Pride iRef. 92) was introduced by Sutton in 1919, 
and has been tested at this Station and by the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture, but probably not yet introduced in the United States. 

It is a Telephone-type pea, moderately tall, quite late; pods 
finely colored, medium sized; peas good dark green. A rather 
characteristic feature is the very frequent presence of leaves on the 
long, thick pod-stalks. The pods do not contain as many peas as 
Telephone nor are these are large. It is said to bear paired pods 
very profusely in England but it was only a fair cropper in our tests. 

Prizetaker (Ref. 93) was introduced into America by Moore 
& Simon as a " fine new English sort." This would seem to sepa- 
rate it from the Prizetaker listed by Sutton & Son in their catalogs 
of 1896 i our earliest! as " a well known variety " and found very 
similar to Hundredfold in the Royal Horticultural Society tests of 
1901. We have been unable to find any other wrinkled-seeded 

MINOR VARIETIES 
Dr. Hogg. Refs. 1 ; Thorburn Car. 1890. Laxton obtained 
Dr. Hogg, sometime before 1872, from a Prolific Long-pod x Little 
Gem cross. It was noticed immediately in an American periodical; 
but apparently was not introduced here until 1890; nor has it ever 
been widely grown. 

The plants were said to be of Sangster No. 1 type, 3 ! 4 to 3% 
feet tall, not branched, and podding somewhat lower than Senator, 
which it apparently resembled closely in pods, tho these were lighter 
in color. It was much earlier than Senator, early midseason, and 
not a heavy bearer. 

Hogg (Yr. Bk. 14:101. 1873) says this is a fine, dwarf, early 
Ne Plus Ultra, but shows curved pods in figure. 

I nique i Refs. 2; Portland Seed Co. Car. 1914) seems to have 
been from the same originator and of the same time of origin and 
parentage as Dr. Hogg, described above, but was very dwarf in 
habit and podded very near the ground. The pods were often paired, 
were broader than those of Dr. Hogg, better green and with larger 
peas. It was very early and matured very promptly. 

We find no record of any pea of the name in America except 
in the catalog of a western seedsman 40 years after the pea originated. 
From the description it may be the same variety. 

Supplanter (Refs. 2a; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. :5:267. 1885) origi- 
nated about 1872, with Laxton, from a Veitch Perfection x Little 
Gem cross. The pea tested at this Station in 1884 could not have 
been this Supplanter, tho received and grown under that name; 
and it is rather doubtful that the real variety was ever grown in 
America. 

From English descriptions, the pea was considered " a great 
improvement on Scimitar," with long, broad, slightly curved, 
pointed or long-rounded pods; very large, pale bluish green peas, 
turning to much indented or wrinkled seeds. The pods were too 
broad for true Senator type, but too long pointed to be included 
with Veitch Perfection, so their curved shape places the variety here. 
It was very late, subject to mildew because of heavy foliage, and 
not very productive. 



Prizetaker in a fairly representative collection of English seedsmen's 
catalogs. 

A Pacific Coast firm say Prizetaker came from England and is 
Alderman. As we grew it, it was rather short-stemmed, branched, 
3 1 ■> to4 feet; pods 4 1 s to4' ■> inches long, narrower and plumper than 
those of Telephone, rather better colored, with about one less pea to 
the pod, but these are very large and dark green. Its season is 
somewhat earlier than that of Telephone, but the crop no better. 
These data would make Prizetaker a very good strain of Alderman. 

Maincrop. Ref. 95. There have been many Maincrops in 
pea literature but the latest one to appear and among the best 
tested here is this one, of Telephone type, which was introduced by 
Clibrans before 1924, and tested by the U. S. Department of Agri- 
culture at McMillan, Mich., and by this Station. 

It differs from Telephone in having scanty foliage, with large, 
broad leaflets in 3s and 4s, " notched " or almost serrated toward the 
tips and very large, round-tipped stipules; in the distinct greenish 
shade of the very large flowers and in the noticeable bluish bloom on 
the pods. These are not quite as long as those of Telephone, but 
fill better and show a high ratio (1:1.3) of pea weight to shelled-pod 
weight. The pods are about like those of Telephone in color, but 
the peas are dull, rather than bright, medium green. Tho tested 
in different years, the season seems to be that of Telephone and the 
crop about the same. In England Maincrop often bears paired 
pods and is very productive. It seemed very resistant to disease, 
showing no sign of root injury from the leaf-spot fungus that damaged 
many varieties tested with it. 

Imperator (Ref. 96' was listed by Buist in 1921, or earlier. 
It was grown here from the introducer's seed, and appeared to be a 
good type of Telephone with broad, dark pods; but from seed from 
the U. S. Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, Mich., 
presumably from the same source originally, a decidedly different 
pea appeared, the variations extending to plant, foliage, pods and 
pea, but not excluding the variety from the Telephone group. 

Peacemaker (Ref. 97 ) was listed by Kelway as an improve- 
ment of Alderman, which an award from the Royal Horticultural 
Society helps to confirm. It is mentioned here only to say it is 
entirely distinct from the Peacemaker listed by Ebbert in 1906, 
which is of Laxtonian type. 

IN SENATOR GROUP 

Seedling Market (Ref. 3) was sent to this Station for testing 
in 1885, by Bennett. 

It was a dwarf, midseason, prompt-maturing variety with 
long, paired pods of Senator type, light in color and with heavy 
bloom; peas 5 to 7, large, slightly compressed, pale in color. 

Charmer (Refs. 5, 6; N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:136. 1889) origi- 
nated with Laxton. He sold the stock to Harrison (2), who intro- 
duced it in 1886. It was tested at this Station in 1888, from seed 
sent by Henderson, but he probably did not introduce it commercially 
as it is not listed in his early catalogs. Apparently the same pea 
was introduced by Vick, tho Laxton's name is not mentioned. It 
was considered promising in tests here, but has not been much grown. 

Charmer was from 3j^ to 4J-4 feet tall, with more sparse, 
smaller foliage than Senator, pods of deep green color, often paired, 
more slender and often with more, smaller and more compressed 
peas. It was a much earlier pea than Senator and very prolific. 

St. Dutlius (Refs. 6; Thorburn Car. 1889) was raised by 

Holmes before 1887, when it received a First Class Certificate from 
the Royal Horticultural Society. It was offered for the first time 
in America in 1899, but has been little grown and is unknown here 
now, tho still obtainable in England. 

Usually less than 3 feet tall in America and only 2 l + in our 
tests from seed grown at McMillan, Mich., much darker in foliage 
than Senator, pods paired, from 14th-15th node; very like those of 
Senator; peas average 7, medium-sized, of good color, which they 
hold in cooking, fairly sweet, but rather tough skinned. Ready in 
late midseason, the one crop was good. 

Stanley. Refs. 13: Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 18:423. 1895; 
Denaiffe L. P. P. 52. 1906. Horsford crossed American Wonder 
and Telephone to secure Stanley, which he introduced in America 
in 1891 and later sent to England where it was highly recommended, 
and to France. It never gained a foothold as did his older pea, 
Market Garden. 

Height variously given as 1 ' I to 3 feet ; stem rigid ; foliage 
' dense, consisting of very large leaflets and stipules, " fresh " green 



114 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



washed with grayish; its pods, from 7th node, 3j-£ to 4 inches long, 
broad, curved, light green in color, and well filled; peas 5 or more, 
large, of excellent quality. It was ready about with Advancer, 
rather earlier than Senator, matured uniformly, and was only 
moderately productive. 

Sterling (Ref. 14a) was grown at the Michigan and Arkansas 
Stations in 1894 from seed supplied by the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture. In Arkansas the vines " made rank growth," but in 
Michigan were severely affected by drouth so no data are given. 

The pods were long, slender, curved, not evenly or well filled; 
peas of fair size and good flavor; seeds " blue " wrinkled. It was 
ready 10 days after the earliest variety; "not specially desirable." 

Maincrop. Refs. 15, 16. The " Maincrop " peas are 
innumerable and separation in many cases impossible; but two, 
grown at this Station, appear to be these: 

(1) Maincrop, from seed received here in 1888 from the Spe- 
cialty 86 Novelty Seed Co., Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire, Eng.: 

Taller than Senator, 4-5 feet., unbranched, foliage medium 
green, little whitened; pods numerous, often paired, 2 \ o to 3 inches 
long, broad, somewhat curved, slightly paler than foliage, with 4-6 
large, flattened or compressed peas; midseason. 

(2) Veitch Maincrop, recently grown from University of British 

Columbia seeds: 

Shorter than Senator, 2Y2 feet, much earlier, stems and 
foliage very similar, pods one-fourth inch shorter, broader, well 
curved, slightly more pointed, similar color, not so well filled, many 
seeds abortive, peas similar and seeds larger; not as productive. 

Glory of Devon. Refs. 17; Vaughan Car. 1908. R. Veitch 
received an Award of Merit for this pea from the Royal Horticultural 
Society in 1899 and it is many times noticed in English pea litera- 
ture, being called in 1925 a " popular West Country maincrop pea." 
Veitch Perfection is given as one of its parents. It was introduced 
into America in 1908. As grown here, from British Columbia seed: 

Height: 2} 2 feet, and otherwise similar in plant to Senator, 
with foliage distinctly marbled; pods decidedly shorter, broader, 
much curved, very poorly filled; peas usually only 3 or 4, very large, 
broad, oval or oblong, flattened, dark green. Its season was about 
that of Senator, perhaps a little later; but it was not productive. 
Evidently not adapted to our conditions, as it was carried but a few 
years by either of its American introducers. 

Rearguard. Ref. 22. Dickson (2) claims introduction of 
Rearguard, tho it was sent to the Royal Horticultural Society in 
1910 by another seedsman. It received an Award of Merit in 1917. 
It was grown here from Idaho Station seed and has not been found 
in American catalogs. 

Hardly of Senator type, the pods being broader and less curved; 
but since it is classed in England as an improved Gladstone, it seems 
best to place it in the group with that variety. Plants quite like 
those of Senator; foliage of about the same shade, modified by heavy, 
bluish bloom; pods begin higher on the stem, 16th node, frequently 
paired. Some pods broader and less curved as indicated above, 
darker than those of Senator, not so well filled; peas 7 in better pods, 
rather darker than Senator's but occasionally showing a yellowish 
tinge. The variety, as the name indicates, is very late, but paired 
pods give yield equal to Senator. 

President (Ref. 231 was tested at the Royal Horticultural 
Society Gardens in 1911, being sent by Dickson & Robinson, Man- 
chester, Eng., presumably the introducers. A later test in the 
Royal Horticultural Society Gardens showed President " too much 
like Union Jack," but it was later and gave a very good crop. Not 
found in American catalogs but tested here from seed sent by the 
Idaho Station. 

It is essentially Senator, with dark, bluish green foliage and 
darker pods, tho the peas are apparently of no better color. Other 
differences were very slight. 

Star of Australia (Ref. 241 is of unknown origin, but it was 
grown here from University of British Columbia seed and seemed an 
inferior Glory of Devon, with rather larger pods, lighter colored and 
poorly filled. The peas were large and of good quality ; but the crop 
was very poor. 

Janus kelway (Ref. 25) originated with Kelway in 1912, 
and is a dwarf Senator with broader, less curved, dark green pods. 
As grown here from Idaho Station seeds: 

Height 1 3 4 to 2 feet : stems stout, erect, greenish white, needing 
no support, somewhat branched; foliage abundant, dark green; pods 
large, uniform, well filled; peas 6 or 7, medium to large, oblong, 



indented, dark green, of very good but not the best quality. Under 
our conditions the pods were borne singly; but even so gave good 
crops. In England the pods are usually in pairs and probably would 
be elsewhere under better pea-growing conditions, since the variety 
set its greenish white flowers very freely and often in pairs. The 
season was a few days later than that of Senator, and the pods 
matured promptly. 

Union Jaek. (Refs. 26; Morse Car. 1922. Union Jack 
probably originated with Hurst before 1918, when sent the Royal 
Horticultural Society for testing. It was brought to America in 
1922, and seed of it came to us from Idaho and from British Columbia 
in that year. 

Aside from a little more vigor, greater height of vine and size 
of pod from the British Columbia seeds, which were more wrinkled, 
the strains were identical, and both very much like President, tho 
later and with less curved and broader pods, those from the Brit- 
ish Columbia seed being better filled. Union Jack, like President, 
may be described as a late, dark-podded Senator. As noted 
under President, a later test made Union Jack the earlier of the two 
varieties. 

Giant Exhibition (Ref. 27) was listed by Salzer in 1918 as 
the " largest pea grown;" but in our tests it has not given as large 
pods as several varieties of the Telephone type. It is excluded 
from that group by the curve of the pods, most noticeable near the 
tip. 

Plants more like those of Telephone than of Senator, 3)^ feet 
tall; stems stout with occasional medial branches, foliage light green 
but abundant, with large, whitened, sharp-tipped stipules having 
shallow teeth up to the middle; flowers from 10th node up, single, 
on long, rather heavy stalks; pods light green, Z"'/% to 4j^ inches 
long, broad, narrow oval in section, only moderately plump, usually 
but not always filled to the tip and seldom to the edge; peas dark 
green, larger than those of Senator but much smaller than those of 
Telephone. It is the latest pea in the Senator group and a poor 
cropper. 

Advance Guard (Ref. 28) originated with Unwin, and was 
introduced as a novelty in 1921. So far as known, it has been 
grown in the United States only in tests — by the U. S. Department 
of Agriculture and this Station. 

Dwarf, 1} 2 to 1 3 4 feet tall (twice as tall in England), with a 
few basal branches; foliage abundant, rather dark, bluish, very 
coarse, only slightly whitened; flowers medium sized, very green at 
the base, from 11th to 13th node, paired; pods rarely paired, of 
typical Senator type, but less curved, 3 J-jj to 3 1 g inches long, uniform, 
rather narrow but plump, well filled both to edge and rounded to 
long-rounded, tipless end; peas 7 to 9, large, square to almost 
cylindrical, medium green, of very good quality; seeds of medium 
size, broad oval, or oblong, flattened, very well wrinkled and almost 
uniformly light bluish green in color, with only an occasional seed 
showing a tint of cream. It gave in midseason very good crop, for 
a variety recently brought across the Atlantic. In England it 
develops " rabbit ear " rogues. 

Freedom (Ref. 29), from Hurst, was given an Award of 
Merit by the Royal Horticultural Society in 1922. So far as known, 
it has been grown in America only at this Station; but seems worthy 
of inclusion because of its productivity, which too many English 
varieties lack when first imported. 

Freedom is an improved and earlier Gladstone, 2-2 '^ feet 
tall, stout-stemmed, erect, occasionally with branches near the top 
of the stems and with abundant, dark foliage, whitened on both 
leaflets and stipules; pods single, from 12th to 14th node, practically 
indistinguishable from those of Gladstone, well filled and produced 
more freely, making this one of the best of the broad-podded, 
Senator-type peas. 

Phenomenon (Ref. 30) originated with Sutton in 1922, and, 
like Freedom, is known in America only by growth in test plats, at 
Wisconsin Station and at this Station. 

Very dwarf, l 1 ^ feet here, but slender-stemmed (said to be 
" stout " in England 1, and drooping, branched both at the ground 
and above; foliage abundant, medium green or dark yellowish green, 
like that of Senator; pods from 12th node, often paired, very large, 
sometimes reaching 5 inches (which, surprisingly, is as long as 
reported for England), broad, moderately plump, slightly but 
distinctly curved, dark green, not always well filled: peas in good 
pods 6 to 9, large, oblong, flattened, sometimes almost triangular, 
smooth surfaced, dark green. The pods are ready a few days after 
those of Senator, are very smooth just before picking time, but soon 
wrinkle coarsely. They are much like those of Jas. Kelway, but 
broader. The above descriptions indicate a very good variety; but 
unfortunately it seems not adapted to our conditions and gave only 
poor to fair crops. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



115 



John Hull Ref. 31 1 was sent by Carter to the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society for testing in 1922 and found " very similar to 
Senator," but later. It is not the John Bull of Laxton, described 
in the Stratagem group. 

Chieftain (Ref. 32 ) was first listed by De Georgi Bros, in 
1894, and is apparently their own. 

Seeds of Chieftain are considerably larger than those of 
Senator, hardly well wrinkled, mixed cream and light green; plants 
like those of Senator, but more dwarf, 1 ;i i to 2 '4 feet, noticeably 
glaucous on both stem and foliage; pods begin at 15th node, single, 
on short, thick stalks, vary in length, 3-' s to 4 :, 4 inches, considerably 
broader but plump, as much curved and as well filled as Senator's; 
peas often 9, medium sized, irregular, sometimes almost disk-shaped, 
light green to medium green. Season is about that of Senator, 
yield good to very good. Tho not tested, the peas are probably 
inferior to the best wrinkled peas in quality. 



('.aimers' Champion was received from the Gallatin Valley 
Seed Co., Bozeman, Mont., and grown here in 1926 only. It is a 
canning pea, of Senator type. 

Foliage much more glaucous, medium green, leaflets notice- 
ably serrate; pods single or occasionally paired, somewhat broader, 
less curved, very short rounded or blunt at the ends; peas 5 to 9 
(average 7), medium to large, oval, indented, poorly colored, of 
good table quality. It is a late midseason variety and our one •crop 
of it was not better than " good." 

Charlton Victory is an exhibition type pea, introduced re- 
cently (year unknown), by Charlton, and grown at McMillan, Mich., 
by the U. S. Department of Agriculture and at this Station. 

It is stouter-stemmed than Senator, flowers greenish white 
beginning at about the 12th node, often paired, as are the very long 
(4'^ to 4 3 4 inches), Senator-like pods, with 7 very large, dark green 
peas of very high quality. It ripened with Senator and gave a very 
good, crop over a rather long season. 



UNDESCRIBED VARIETIES 



Names of many peas have been found in American catalogs, 
periodicals, and Station reports or bulletins, without sufficient 
data to classify the varieties. These names are given below, but 
lack of space makes it advisable to omit both references and scanty 
data given. Such information as we have will be filed for future 
reference and will be gladly supplied to any one interested. 

Poorly described varieties of peas. American Racer, 
Bennett Green Prolific, Branching Prolific, Carsten Prolific Dwarf, 
Crosby Hybrid, Dainty, Dew Drop, Early Cluster, Early Queen, 
Early Woodside, Erfurt Early Dwarf Green Marrow, Erfurt Earliest 
May, Free Trade, Glory of England, Geo. Clelland, Keen Early 
Seedling, King of the Market, Liliputian, Magdeburg Gold, Mam- 
moth Beauty, Neapolitan, New York Mammoth Sweet Marrow, 
Perpetual Early Prize. Plymouth Rock, Pole, Pride of Georgia, 
Prize Early, Puget Sound, Puritan, Ratekin New Wonder. Read 
Favorite, Remarkable, Royal Bengal Mammoth Prolific Wonder, 
Second Early, Second Early Market Garden, Shilling Queen, 
Standard Early, Standard Late, Standard Midseason, Strasburg, 
Strategy, Trant Evergreen, Vermont, Vick Nos. 1, 2, 3, Vilmorin 
Blue Wrinkled, Vilmorin Marrow, Warriston Wonder, White Bruns- 
wick, White Rose, Wife's Pin Money, Woodruff Wonder. 

The following varieties, not otherwise known to us, were listed, 
without description or mention of source where previously noted, 
in Bailey's Annals of Horticulture for 1889, pages 123 to 125: Allen 
Superb, Blue Gem, Blue Mohawk, Early French, Early Magog, 
Golden Gem, Huntington Mammoth, New Dominion (may be 
Dominion, a field pea) and Wonder Gem. 

In Bulletin No. 21 (pages 272-293) of the Bureau of Plant 
Industry of the United States Department of Agriculture, issued in 
1903, are recorded the varieties (or names) of peas listed in the 
catalogs of American seedsmen for 1901 and 1902. Of the following 



garden peas there given, we have been unable to obtain further his- 
tory or description: Abbott of Bardney, Abbott of Reading, Allan 
Number One, Canners' Favorite, Carter Elephant, Cleveland Mar- 
ket, Early Norther, Early of Earlies, Early Wrinkle, Encore, Extra 
Early Deposit (probably Despot), Fame, Hawkins Market Garden 
(probably Horsford Market Garden), Hero, Inexhaustible, Island 
Prolific, Keith First on Market, Lilly-Bogardus Thoroughbred, 
Little Giant, Market Gardeners' Favorite, Niles, Northern Leader, 
Northern Queen, Pride of Denver, Pride of the Garden, Second 
Crop. Southern Queen, Tuxedo, White Champion, and Wisbeck 
Wonder. 

Many peas unknown to the authors have been grown on the 
United States Department of Agriculture plats at McMillan, 
Mich., of which some varieties, selected from a complete list of 
all grown there in 1925, may soon become of interest to American 
growers. This list was furnished by Dr. D. N. Shoemaker of the 
Bureau of Plant Industry of the United States Department of 
Agriculture. The varieties here noted are mainly recent introduc- 
tions of English and other European seedsmen or for other reasons 
are likely soon to be brought to America for further testing or com- 
mercial growing: Bedford Star and Bedford Wonder, Boquet, The 
Breck, Chancelot, Cheltonian, Clibran Abundant, Clibran Hale 
Perfection, Dwarf Blue Caper, Early Bank Balance, Finchley Wonder, 
Forerunner, Green Feast, Kinver Gem, Prelude, Primavera, and 
Saxa. About 50 additional varieties, similar to those just given in 
history and possible future prospects, were included in the Depart- 
ment tests at Arlington Farms in 1928. Hundreds of other varieties, 
mainly from foreign sources, are mentioned in Dr. Shoemaker's lists, 
but these have been secured and grown mainly for historical, sys- 
tematic or comparison purposes, rather than with any idea that the 
varieties would be added to our already too extensive list of peas. 



116 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



REFERENCES, NAMES AND SYNONYMS 



EARLY EXTRA GROUP 



1. Parkinson Par. Ter. 552. 1629. French, or Fulham. 2. 
Fuller, Stacy, Blackwell Cat. 1688 (Rptd. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 
21:107. 1898). Barns Hotspur, Long Hotspur, Short Hotspur. 
3. Citizen of Virginia (John Randolph) Treat. Gard. 40. (about 
1765, rptd. 1924). Ormond. 1. Mawe-Abercrombie Univ. Gard. 
Bot.: Pisum. 1778. Early Golden Hotspur, Early Charlton Hot- 
spur, Nicholas Earliest Hotspur. 5. Thompson Gard. Asst. 320. 
1859. Golden Charlton, Hotspur, Early Nicholas Hotspur, Nimble 
Taylor, Paddington, Essex, Reading (see 7), Russell's Early Blos- 
somed, White Boiling, Early Sugar Frame, Michaux, Michaux ordi- 
naire, De Rouelle, Domine, Petit Pois de Paris. 6. Burr Fid. 
Gard. Veg. 535. 1863 (citing Lawson Agr. Man. 1836). Golden 
Hotspur, Reading Hotspur, Superfine Early. 7. Jour. Hort. 
48:379. 1872. Hots, Flanders Hotspur, Brampton Hotspur, Essex 
Hotspur, Omerod's Hotspur, Early Nichols' Hotspur, Charlton Hot- 
spur, Early Charlton, Hastings, Marquis of Hastings, Essex Read- 
ings (see 5). it. Rural N. Y. 32:107. 1874. Virginia Hotspur 
(now called Early Tone (Frame?)). 9. Hort. Reg. .'5:210. 1834. 
Late Dwarf, Early Single Frame, Earliest Double Blossomed, Charl- 
ton, Common White Boiling, Very Fine Late Garden, Brussels Early 
Blossomed, Twesley Dwarf, 1 Michaux a la rouelle, Michaux precoce. 
10. Gard. Chron. 271. 1848. Fairbeard's Early Surprise. 11. 
Ibid. 52. 1850. Wrench's Early Hotspur, Common Hotspur, 
Eastern Shore. 12. Sinclair & Moore Car. 1826. Early Double- 
Blossomed Frame. 13. Hort. Reg. 3:209. 1834. Best Early, 
Earliest Frame, True Early Frame, Early Dwarf Frame, Earliest 
Dwarf Frame, Very Early Frame, Early May, Young's Early Frame, 
Early Nicholas, Early Dwarf, Dwarf Frame, Perkins's (Perkin's in 
19), Early Frame, Early Pana, Early French, Early Scone, Bates' 
(Batt's in 19) Early Dwarf Nimble, Baran (Baron in 16 and 19), 
Laurant (Laurent in 16 and 19), Early Single Frame, Early One- 
eyed, Single Frame, Double Blossomed Frame, Double Dwarf 
Frame, Mason's Double Blossomed, Superfine Double Early, 
Russel's (Russell's in 16), Fine Early, Michaux de Hollande, Dwarf 
Albany, Vert a rames de Mont Julien (Julienne in 16), Early Wil- 
son, Plus hatif. 14. Rogers Veg. Cult. 225. 1839. Early Single- 
blossomed Frame. 15. Ibid. 226. 1839. Early Racehorse. 16. 
Gard. Chron. 52. 1850. Early Warwick. 17. Ibid. 661. 1852. 
Florentiner Pfluckerbse. 18. Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 2:57. 1855. 
Essex Champion. 19. Thompson Gard. Asst. 319. 1859. Single 
Blossomed Frame, Young's Very Early, De Paris. 20. Gard. 
Chron. 620. 1865. Early Waterloo, Prince Albert, Early Kent. 

21. Ibid. 172. 1866. Minier's Early Frame or Sangster's No. 1. 

22. Ibid. 711. 1867. Early Nimble, Early Emperor, Daniel 
O'Rourke. 23. Landreth Car. 1892. Early Washington. 21. 
Denaiffe LP. P. 115. 1906. De Sainte-Catherine. 25. Vilmorin- 
Andrieux PI. Pot. 429. 1883. (Same as 22, second.) 26. Lan- 
dreth Cat. 1824. Landreth's Extra Early. 27. Country Gent. 
14:266. 1859. Early Burlington. 28. Russell Car. 1827. (Same 
as 23), True May. 29. Amer. Gard. Mag. 2:428. 1836. Tall 
Frame. 30. Gard. Chron. 550. 1848. Early Grey Warwick. 
31. Cot. Gard. 25:260. 1861. (Same as 15), Racehorse (Same as 
18). 32. Mag. Hort. 10:97. 1844. (Same as 15.) 33. Burr 
Fid. Gard. Veg. 535. 1863. Cedo Nulli. 34. Gard. Chron. 
711. 1867. Washington. 35. Steckler Cat. 1913. Early May 
(possibly incorrect). 36. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 12:27. 1892. 
Warner's Early Conqueror. 37. Mag. Hort. 15: 156. 1849. (Same 
as 22, second.) 38. Thompson Gard. Asst. 330. 1863. Early 
Bedalean, Early Railway, Stevenson's Railway. 39. Cot. Gard. 
25:232. 1861. Early Sebastopol, Morning Star, Rising Sun. 40. 
Gard. Chron. 220. 1865. Conqueror. 41. Denaiffe LP. P. 112. 
1906. A la reine, Prodige, Bergere, Prime. 42. Cot. Gard. 
25:232. 1861. Girling's Danecroft. 43. Jour. Hort. 48:379. 
1872. Warner's Danecroft Rival, Girling's Pea, Glass Pea. 41. 
Mcintosh Book Gard. 2:57. 1855. Danecroft Early Green, 
Fames' Conservative Green Marrow, Transparent. 15. Gard. 
Chron. 753. 1850; and 582. 1856. Rendle's First Early, Rendle's 
First Early Green. 46. Breck Car. 1838. Cedo Nullis. 17. 
Mag. Hort. 10:91, 93. 1844. Sinclair's Early. 48. White, Jeff. 
Caf. 1846. Early Cedo Nulli. 49. Strong. B. H. & Co. Car. 
1838. English Cedo Nulli. 50. Gard. Chron. 713. 1841: 630. 
1843; 713. 1844. Fames' Superior First Early. 51. Ibid. 665. 
1842. (Same as 20, second.) 52. Ibid. 476. 1844. Clutton's 
Early. 53. Warner's Gard. & Nurs. Car. 1845. Early Prince 
Albert. 51. Dunlap & Thompson Car. 1847. Cormack's 'McCor- 
mick's, incorrectly, in 13) Prince Albert. 55. Denaiffe LP. P. 105. 
1906. Chaud, Bresilien, Hatif de Plainpalais lias in 57), Extra 
Early. 56. Gard. Chron. 1. 1843. (Same as 20, last.) 57. Mcin- 
tosh Book Gard. 2:55. 1855. Kent's Early. 58. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 



3:250. 1885. Extra Early Kent, Dilliston's (ne's in 106) Early, 
De Regneville, Hatif uniflore de Gendbrugge. 59. Douglas Caf. 
1843. Early Nimble Dick. 60. Mag. Hort. 10:91, 93. 1844. 
Hill's Extra Early. 61. Hovey Cat. 1859. Early Hill. 62. 
Gard. Chron. 2. 1846. Fames' Earliest May. 63. Denaiffe 
LP. P. 117. 1906. Tres hatif de Mai. 64. Vilmorin-Robinson 
Veg. Gard. 496. 1920. Very Early May. 65. Sinclair Caf. 
1839. Cromwell's May. 66. Gard. Chron. 17. 1847. Beda- 
lean. 67. Mcintosh Book Gard. 2:57. 1855. (Same as 38, 
first.) 68. Gard. Chron. 721. 1849. Sutton's Early Champion. 
69. Ibid. 549. 1856. Warner's Conqueror. 70. Ibid. 1237. 1866; 
660. 1868. Sutton's Improved Early Champion (Same as 22, 
last). 71. Ibid. 33. 1853. Fairhead's Early Champion. 72. 
Ibid. 834. 1854. Fairhead's Early Conqueror. 73. Ibid. 753, 
755. 1850. Isherwood's Railway. 71. Mcintosh Book Gard. 
2:57. 1855. (Same as 38, second and last.) 75. Jour. Hort. 
33:467. 1865. Dillistone's Early Prolific, Sutton's Ringleader, 
Carter's First Ciop, Fairbeard's (incorrectly for Fairhead's) Con- 
queror, Fairbeard's (Fairhead's in 76) Railway. 76. Gard. Chron. 
580. 1865. Fairhead's Railway. 77. Ibid. 704. 1851. (Same as 
21, last.) 78. Ibid. 532. 1855. (Same as 22, last, questionably 
placed.) 79. Ibid. 1016. 1859. (Same as 22, last, unquestioned.) 
Dunnett's First Early, Carter's Earliest, Veitch's First Early. 80. 
Jour. Horf. 48. 467. 1865. Dickson's First and Best Early, Car- 
penter's Express, Fairbeard's Hardy Early. 81. Gard. Chron. 
220, 580, 1065. 1865. Sebastopol, Sutton's Champion, Fairbeard's 
"Hardys" Early, Hooper's New Rival. 82. Jour. Hort. 18:378. 
1865. (Same as 81, second), Dickson's First and Best, Dickson's 
Climax, Early Caractacus, Taber's Perfection, Hooper's Early Rival. 
83. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 2:618. 1887. Henderson's First of All, 
Cleveland's First and Best, Rural New Yorker, Carter's Lightning, 
Hurst's Improved, Sangster No. 1, Sharpe's First Early, (Veitch's) 
Selected Extra Early; also Alaska and Harrison's Eclipse (errone- 
ously, as both are green-seeded). 81. Ibid. 3rd ser. 24:99. 1898. 
Dandy. 85. Vilmorin-Robinson Veg. Gard. 495. 1920. Improved 
Early Champion. 86. Mag. Hort. 18:332. 1852; and 19:9. 1853. 
Hovey's Extra Early. 87. Gard. Chron. 50. 1852. Taylor's 
New Early Prolific. 88. Ibid. 487. 1857. Taylor's Prolific. 89. 
Burr Field Gard. Veg. 549. 1863. Taylor's Early. 90. Gard. 
Chron. 673. 1853. Waite's Daniel O'Rourke. 91. Hovey Caf. 
1854. Early Daniel O'Rourke. 92. Country Gent. 1 1:266. 1859. 
(Same as 26.) 93. Thompson Gard. Asst. 320. 1859. Sangster's 
New. 94. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 533. 1863. Waite's Dan 
O'Rourke, Early Dan O'Rourke. 95. Gard. Chron. 771. 1867. 
(Same as 77.) 96. Gregory Cat. 1885. Extra Early Daniel 
O'Rourke. 97. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:249. 1885. Dan O'Rourke, 
Sevastopol, (79, last three, 81, second i, Daniel. 98. Rural N. Y. 
48:140. 1889. Improved Daniel O'Rourke, First of All, Earliest 
of All (probably incorrect), Extra Early, "and many other varie- 
ties." 99. Denaiffe L. P. P. 109. 1906. De Hollande jaune, Daniel 
First and Best. 100. Gard. Chron. 816. 1855. Cottrell's Sebas- 
topol. 101. Ibid. 487. 1857. (Same as 81, first.) 102. Hovey 
Cat. 1859. Early Sebastopol. 103. Country Gent. 10:41. 1857. 
Far-famed Sir Moot. 104. Gard. Chron. 856. 1858. (Same as 
79, second.) 105. Ibid. 1017, 1035. 1859. (Same as 20, second 
and last ), Dillstone's First Early. 106. Cof. Gard. 25: 231. 1861. 
Dillistone's (Dilliston's incorrectly in 58, second ) Early. 107. Gard. 
Chron. 220, 1865. Ringleader (82, second'. 108. Ibid. 194. 1866. 
Single Blossomed Early Frame. 109. Hovey Caf. 1869. Early 
Dillistone. 109a. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:71. 1873. Clarke's 
Rapid Prolific. 110. Weston Amer. Home Gard. 163. 1860. 
Petersburg. 111. Gard. Chron. 2. 1846. Prince of Wales (smooth- 
seeded). 112. Thorburn Caf. 1861. Princess. 113. U.S. Com. 
Agr. Rpt. 98. 1865. Princess of Wales. III. Country Gent. 
19:79. 1862. Early Princess. 115. Amer. Agr. 20:245. 1861. 
Extra Early Princess. 116. Gard. Chron. 580. 1865. Same as 

81, last.) 117. Jour. Hort. 33:467. 1865. (Same as 80, last.) 
118. Gard. Chron. 1071. 1863. (Same as 80, second.) 119. 
Gard. Chron. 1054. 1864. (Same as 75, second.) 120. Ibid. 
1048. 1865. First Crop. 121. Jour. Hort. 33:467. 1865. (Same 
as 75.) 122. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:249. 1885. Dixon's i Dickson's, 
correctly, in 82, second) First and Best. 123. U. S. Comr. Agr. Rpt. 
29. 1865. First and Best Early. 121. Gard. Chron. 121. 1865. 
Caractacus. 125. Evans Caf. 1868. Waite's Caractacus. 126. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpts. 1:197. 1883; 3:250. 1885. (Same as 21, last, 34, 

82, second, 85). Tabei's Perfection Taber's, correctly, in 82, fifth). 
127. Landreth Cat. 1892. Extra Early Prince Albert. 128. 
Denaiffe L.P.P. 109. 1906. Pierre, Prince Albert ordinaire, d'Avent 
(in Picardiei. 129. U. S. Comr. Agr. Rpt. 29. 1865. Wheeler's 



■Should be Tewsley Dwarf, and properly a synonym of White Prussian. Gard. Chron. 199. 1850. 



REFERENCES, NAMES AND SYNONYMS 



117 



Extra Early. 130. L. c. Deacon's Double Extra Early. 131. 
L. c. Philadelphia Extra Early. 131a. Ferry Cat. 1875. Bur- 
lington, or Philadelphia Early. 132. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. .'J: 248. 1885. 
Philadelphia, Extra Early Philadelphia, Cleveland's Rural New 
Yorker, Dexter, Thorburn's Extra Early Market, Ferry's and Sib- 
ley's and Thorburn's First and Best, Hancock, (Same as 261, (Same 
as 83, first and second '. 133. Johnson & Stokes Cat. 1892. 
(Same as 20, last, and 75, third. I 134. Bolgiano, J. Car. 1906. 
First and Best. 135. Thorburn Caf. 1908. First of All. 136. 
Jour. Hort. 18:378. 1865. (Same as 82, fifth.) 137. Gard. 
Chron. 1141, 1189. 1866. Taber's Early Perfection. I. ill. Ibid. 
711. 1867. Early Perfection iBrown). 139. Ibid. 1055. 1865. 
Earliest and Best. 1 10. Ibid. 1218. 1866. Poynter's Earliest and 
Best. 141. Ibid. 630. 1868. Poynter's First and Best. 112. 
Ferre, Batchelder & Co. Car. 1869. Electric. 143. Hawley Caf. 
1868. East Hartford. 144. Rural N. Y. 18:144. 1889. Early 
Hartford. 145. Griswold, T. Caf. 1914. East Hartford Extra 
Earlv. 1 16. Cadwell & Jones Caf. 1914. Hawley 's Improved 
East Hartford Extra Early. 117. Gard. Chron. 1360, 1493, 1527, 
1658. 1872; and 1762. 1873. Emerald Gem, Sutton's No. 1 Green, 
Sutton's First of All. 117a. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:73. 1873. 
Sutton's Earliest of All. 118. Denaiffe LP. P. 108. 1906. Emer- 
aude, Joseph, \as 43, first, incorrectly). 119. Country Gent. 
30:134. 1871. Buist's Extra Early. 150. Gregory Caf. 1872. 
Extra Early Winship. 151. Ibid. 1873. (As synonym in 132, 
fourth.) 152. Farquhar Caf. 1892. Early Dexter. 153. Elliott, 
Wm.,Caf. 1899. Improved Early Dexter. 151. Allan Cat. 1914. 
Allan's Early Dexter. 155. Gregory Caf. 1878. Hancock. 156. 
Mass. Hort. Soc. Trans. 170. 1882. Hancock's Early. 157. 
Ferry Caf. 1882. (As synonym in 132, sixth.) 158. (As 156.) 
Laxton's Earliest of All (erroneous, as this is a green-seeded pea). 

159. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Iowa Challenge, Iowa's Challenge. 

160. Vaughan Caf . 1883. Boston Extra Early. 161. Rural N.Y. 
43:553. 1883. Carter's New. 162. Ibid. 288, 554. 1883. Hen- 
derson's First of All. 163. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 22:308, 374, 407. 

1884. Veitch's Selected Extra Early. 164. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:264. 

1885. Ferry's Extra Early. 165. Rural N. Y. 12:554. 1883. 
(Same as 83, third.) 166. Amer. Gard. 12:688. 1891. (Same as 
132, third.) 167. Rural N. Y. 13:414. 1884. Reedland. 168. 
Gard. Mo. 25:48. 1883. Breck's Excelsior. 169. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
4:186,187. 1886. Vick's Extra Early. 170. Everett Caf. 1885. 
Extra Early Reliance. 171. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 1: 187. 1886. Ever- 
itt's Extra Early Reliance. 172. Kans. Sta. Rpt. 2: 152, 158. 1889. 
Everitt's Extra Early Alliance (by error). 173. Gregory Cat. 1885. 
Maud S. 171. Mich. Sta. Bui. 57:41. 1885. Extra Early Maud 
S. 175. Ford Caf. 1884. Perfection. 176. Mich. Sta. Bui. 
131:31. 1896. Morning Star. 177. Allan Cat. 1914. Allan's 
Maud S. 178. Daniels Caf. 1892. Gem of the Season, Daniels'. 
179. RuralN. Y. 41:463. 1885. Smith's Extra Early. 180. N. Y. 
Sta. Rpt. 5:248. 1887. Burpee's Extra Early. 181. Gard. 
Chron. n. ser. 26:824. 1886. Lightning. 182. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
Trans. 34:289. 1908. Giant Lightning. 183. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
6:331. 1888. Carter's Lightning. 181. Denaiffe LP. P. 107. 1906. 
Eclair. 185. Moore & Simon Cat. 1907. M. & S. Lightning Extra 
Earlv. 186. Gregory Caf. 1906. Pedigree Extra Early. 187. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 5:248. 1887. First in Market. 188. Ford Cat. 
1894. Livingston's First in Market. 189. Ann. Hort. 184. 1892. 
Snowflake. 190. Mich. Sta. Bui. 57:41. 1890. Best Extra Early. 
191. Burpee Cat. 1893. Burpee's Best Extra Early. 192. Denaiffe 
L.P.P. 104. 1906. Triple X Extra Early. 193. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 



7:135. 1889. Hampden Earliest. 191. Colo. Sta. Rpt. 189. 
1889. Lee's Earliest. 195. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 8:318. 1890. Summit. 
196. Northrup Cat. 1899. Northrup's Summit. 197. Denaiffe, 
L.P.P. 105. 1906. Extra Early Summit. 198. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
8:318. 1890. Bergen Fleetwing. 199. U. S. D. A., B. P. I. Bui. 
21:282. 1903. Grenell's Extra Early Bergen Fleetwing. 200. Ann. 
Hort. 123. 1889. Buist's Premier Extra Early. 201. Undated 
notes by C. E. Hunn, about 1889. Buist's Early Morning. 202. 
Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Buist's Early Morning Star. 203. Lan- 
dreth Caf. 1892. (Sameasl76.) 201. Buist Cat. 1922. Buist's 
Extra Early Morning Star. 205. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Orange 
County Morning Star. 206. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 5: 248. 1887. Eureka 
Extra Early. 207. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. Dreer's Eureka Extra 
Early. 208. Mich. Sta. Bui. 109:57. 1894. Extra Early Chal- 
lenge. 209. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. Currie's Extra Early Chal- 
lenge. 210. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Thorburn's Extra Early Mar- 
ket. 211. RuralN. Y. 55:435. 1896. Extra Early Market. 212. 
Ann. Hort. 112, 124, 125. 1889. Extra Early: Ely's, Faust's, John- 
son & Stokes, Maule's, Plant's, Wilson's Improved. 213. Field Caf. 
1907. Improved Extra Early. 211. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. 
(Sameasl34.) 215. Harris Cat. 1894. (Same as 98, third.) 216. 
Condon Caf. 1913. Selected First and Best. 217. Alexander Cat. 
1911. (Same as 131, 135, 187.) 218. Ford Cafs. 1912, 1918. (Same 
as 173), Prolific Early Market. 219. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Leon- 
ard's First and Best of All. 220. Vilmorin-Robinson Veg. Gard. 
494. 1920. (Same as 20, second.) 221. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. 
Perry's Forty-two Days. 222. N. Y. Mkt. Gardnrs. Assn. Caf. 

1892. Wood's Lightning Excelsior. 223. Wood Caf. 1895. Light- 
ning Excelsior. 221. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 9:293. 1891. Electric 
(not same as 142). 225. Mich. Sta. Bui. 90:15. 1893. Budlong. 
226. Ann. Hort. 194. 1892. Nebraska Lightning. 227. Ky. Sta. 
Rpt. 5:26. 1894. Family Garden. 228. Johnson & Stokes Cat. 

1893. Extra Early Market Garden. 229. Hastings Cafs. 1907. 
1924. John L. 230. Gregory Caf. 1894. Sunol. 231. Dreer 
Cat. 1894. Dreer's Extra Early Pioneer. 232. Buckbee Cat. 

1894. Lightning Express. 233. Va. Sta. Bui. 60:5. 1896. Des- 
pot. 234. Landreth Caf . 1896. Canada Extra Early. 235. L. c. 
Evergreen Pod. 236. Weeber & Don Caf. 1898. New York 
Market. 236a. Elliott, Wm. Cat. 1899. Earliest Market. 237. 
Johnson & Stokes Caf. 1898. Record Extra Early. 238. Michell 
Caf. 1899. Dandy Extra Early. 239. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 
30:6. 1901. McLean's Best of All. 210. U. S. D. A., B. P. I. 
Bui. 21:282. 1903. Grey's Perfection. 211. Maule Cat. 1901. 
Prolific Early Market. 212. Ibid. 1905. Prolific Extra Early. 
243. Farquhar Cat. 1904. Farquhar's Prolific Early. 211. U. S. 
D. A., B. P. I. Bui. 21:289. 1903. Rice's Extra Early. 245. 
Sonderegger Caf. 1892. Monster-podded Extra Early. 216. 
Griffith & Turner Cat. 1902. First Early. 217. Michell Cat. 
1902. Michell's Special Extra Early. 218. S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:4. 
1904. Keeney's Extra Early. 219. U. S. D. A., B. P. I. Bui. 
21:287. 1903. Northwest Premier. 250. Ibid. 292, 1903. Tri- 
umph. 251. Bolgiano, J. Caf. 1906. Extra Early Triumph. 252. 
L. c. Good Luck. 253. Farmer Cat. 1914. Pedigree First and 
Best. 251. Isbell Caf. 1906. Monarch of Earlies. 255. Tinsley 
Caf. 1911. Early Dixie. 256. Isbell Cat. 1912. Saxonia. 257. 
J. M. McCullough Cat. 1913. Ohio Chief. 258. Tait Cat. 1913. 
Maximus. 259. Leonard Caf. 1913. Mauretania. 260. Wood, 
Stubbs, Cat. 1913. Blue Ribbon Chieftain. 261. Williams Caf. 
1918. Record Breaker. 262. Reuter Caf. 1918. Peerless Extra 
Early. 263. Galloway Cat. 1924. Eversure. 



TOM THUMB GROUP 



1. Russell Cat. 1827. Dwarf Spanish or Fan. 2. Hort. 
Reg. 3:207. 1834. Early Spanish Dwarf, Knoxes (Knox's in 3) 
Dwarf, Common Spanish Dwarf, Dwarf Crooked Sugar, Eventail, 
Early France Sugar, Dwarf Bog. 3. Gard. Mag. (Loudon) No. 77. 
1836. En Eventail, New Early Spanish Dwarf. 1. Gard. Chron. 
620. 1842. Knox Dwarf. 5. Burr Field. Gard. Veg. 547. 1863. 
Strawberry. 6. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 1 1:75. 1873. Spanish Dwarf. 
7. Hort. Reg. 3:208. 1834. Late Spanish Dwarf, Tres nain de 
Bretagne. 8. Gard. Chron. 53. 1850. Tres nain De Brest. 9. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:265, 273. 1885. Very Dwarf Bretagne, Nain de 
Keroulas, Extra Early Dwarf Breton or Brittany. 10. Vilmorin- 
Robinson Veg. Gard. 515. 1920. Very Dwarf Brittany. 11. 
Landreth Caf. 1832. Early Bishop's Dwarf Prolific. 12. Hort. 
Reg. 3:207. 1834. Bishop's Dwarf Prolific. 13. Gard. Mag. No. 
77. 1836. Bishop's Dwarf. 11. Sinclair Caf. 1839. Bishop's 
Early Dwarf. 15. Douglas Caf. 1843. Bishop's Early Dwarf Pro- 
lific. 16. Denaiffe L.P.P. 62. 1906. L'Eveque. 17. Gard. 
Chron. 82. 1848. Clarke's Ringwood. 18. Country Gent. 9: 111. 
1857. Clark's New Early Ringwood Marrow. 19. Gard. Chron. 
3. 1858. 1, 1017. 1859. Tom Thumb. 20. Florist 300. 1860. 
Nain hatif extra. 21. Cof. Gard. 25:232, 260. 1861. Beck'sGem, 
Royal Dwarf, Ringwood Marrow, Flanagan's Early, Beck's Marrow. 
22. Burr Field Gard. Veg. 545, 549. 1863. Early Ringwood. 23. 
Burr in Amer. Jour. Hort. 7:222. 1870. Barr's Tom Thumb. 
21. /our. Hort. 18:379. 1872. Turner's Royal Dwarf, De Grace, 
Buchsbaum, Essex Rival i probably incorrect). 25. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 



3:264. 1885. Extra Early Dwarf Tom Thumb, Bush Pea, Sutton's 
Long-podded Tom Thumb, Beck's Early Gem. 26. Buckbee Cat. 
1894. Strawberry. 27. Plant Caf. 1896. Plant's Earliest Dwarf 
28. Denaiffe L.P.P. 27. 1906. Nain tres hatif a chassis, Nain Gon- 
tier. 29. Bolgiano, J. Cat. 1911. Blue Peter, incorrectly. 30. Gard. 
Chron. 781. 1845. Queen of the Dwarfs, Waite's. 31. Jour. 
Hort. Soc. London 1:270. 1849. Bishop's New Long-podded. 
32. Garc/. Chron. 53. 1850. Bishop's Long-pod. 33. Ibid. 487. 
1857. Bishop's Dwarf Long-pod. 31. Cot. Gard. 25:260. 1861. 
Bishop's Improved. 35. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:251. 1885. Bishop's 
Long-podded, Nain Bishop a longues cosses. 36. Rural N. Y. 11: 15. 
1860. Strawberry not Field Creeper. 37. Amer. Agr. 18: 190 and 
19:18. 1861; 20:207, 293. 1862; 28:45. 1869. (As 26), Straw- 
berry Vine, Guinea Dwarf, (as 24, second and third). 38. Gard. 
Chron. 1238. 1866. Peabody. 39. L. c. Dwarf Waterloo. 40. 
Vick Caf. 1869. Dwarf Waterloo Marrow. 11. Rural N. Y. 
12:554. 1883. Garden Pride. 12. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:251. 1885. 
Very Dwarf Coutourier. 13. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. Reed'sEarly 
DwarfPrize, Reed's Early Prize. 11. Porter Walton Co. Caf. 1922. 
Dwarf Prize. 15. Fla. Sta. Bui. 11:18. 1891. McNeil. 15a. 
U. S. D. A., B. P. I., Bui. 21:285. 1903. McNeal. 46. Hastings 
Caf. 1922. Florida McNeil. 17. Ann. Hort. 184. 1892. Very 
Dwarf Rural New Yorker. 18. Leonard Caf. 1913. D'Anonay 
Amelior. 19. Vilmorin-Andrieux Caf. 1892. Nain tres hatif 
d'Annonay. 50. Simon-Louis Freres Caf. 1922-23. Annonay Very 
Early. 51. Elgin Seed Co. Caf. 1913. Northern Wonder. 



118 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



MARROWFAT GROUP 



1. Parkinson Par. Ter. 522. 1629. White Rounciva!, Hast- 
ing. 2. Mawe-Abercombie Univ. Gard. Bot.: Pisum. 1778. 
Egg. 3. Switzer Cat. 1731. (rptd. Gard. Chron. 3d ser. 21:89. 

1898). Marrowfats. 4. Mawe-Abercrombie. Univ. Gard. Bot.: 
Pisum. 1778. Tall Marrowfat, Dwarf Marrowfat. Large White 
Marrowfat. 5. Hort. Reg. 3:242. 1834. Tall Marrow, Large 
Improved Marrowfat. Tall Carolina, Sanspareil, De Marly, New 
Tall Temple, Clive, Wootten, Princess, Large Carolina, Suise. 6. 
Douglas Car. 1843. Giant Marrowfat. 7. Thorburn Cat. 1844. 
Giant Marrow. 8. Gard. Chron. 52. 1852. Large Imperial Mar- 
row, Princesse, Suisse. 9. Thompson Gard. Asst. 320. 1859. 
Large Imperial Marrow Fat. 10. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 548. 
1863. Tall White Marrow. 11. Landreth Cars. 1824, 1832. Large 
Marrowfat. 12. Landreth Car. 1892. Irish Large White Mar- 
rowfat. 13. Condon Car. 1922. English Marrowfat. 14. Hort. 
Reg. 3:209. 1834. Dwarf White Prussian, Stowe Prolific, New 
Dwarf Norman, White Prolific, Poor Man's Profit, Tall Prussian, 
New Tewsly, Tweesly Marrow, Wrenches (Wrench's in 20) White 
Union, Dwarf Tewsley, Royal Dwarf, Royal Dwarf Marrow, Royal 
Prolific. 15. Ibid. 3:241. 1834. Dwarf White Marrow, Early 
Rhenish Marrow, Dwarf Marrow, Wabash, Glory of England, Sans 
parchemin demi rames (incorrectly?), (as 5, fourth). 16. Lawson 
Agr. Man. 78. 1834. Dwarf Prolific. 17. Gard. Chron. 713. 
1841. American Dwarf. 18. Ibid. 53. 1850. Hatif a la moelle 
d'Angleterre, Hatif a la moelle Espagne. 19. Hovey Car. 1859. 
Early Dwarf Marrowfat. 20 Thompson Gard. Asst. 319. 1859. 
Dwarf White Prolific. 21. Amer. Home Gard. 163. 1860. Mis- 
souri Marrowfat. 22. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 533. 1863. Early 
Dwarf Marrowfat. 23. Amer. Hort. Ann. 135. 1867. Brown's 
Dwarf Marrowfat. 24. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:243. 1884. Brown's 
New Dwarf Early Marrowfat. 25. Perry Cat. 1892. White Royal 
Dwarf Marrowfat. 26. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 471. 1883. 
White Russian. 27. Parkinson Par. Ter. 522. 1629. Scottish, 
Tufted, Rose. 28. Mawe-Abercrombie Univ. Gard. Bot.: Pisum. 
1778. Crown, Painted Lady Crown, Cluster. 29. Hort. Reg. 
3:242. 1834. American Crown, Turc ou couronne, Turc a fleur 
blanc (fleurs blanches in 32). 30. Lawson Agr. Man. 81. 1834. 
White Crown. 31. Cultivator 2(3): 131. 1846. Ribbon Stalk. 
32. Gard. Chron. 52. 1850. Paquette. 33. Jour. Hort. 48:379. 
1872. Bunch, Mummy. 34. Gard. Chron. 41. 1873. Royal 
Belshazzar, probably Grimstone's Egyptian. 35. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
Jour. 26:279. 1901. Tree Pea Eccentric. 36. Denaiffe LP. P. 
151. 1906. P. a ombelles, P. paquet. 37. Russell Car. 1828. 
Ladies' Finger Marrow. 38. Jour. Hort. Soc. London 4:270. 
1849. Lady's Finger. 39. Vilmorin-Robinson, Les. PI. Pot. 433. 
1883. Doigt de dame. 40. Russell Car. 1827. Matchless, or 
True Marrowfat. 41. U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. (Agr.) 1859. Matchless 
Marrow. 42. Florist 301. 1860. Stradsett Marrow. 43. Jour. 
Hort. 1:62. 1861. Milford Marrowfat, Stradsett Marrow. 44. 
Gard. Chron. 818. 1842. Young's Large Milford Marrowfat. 45. 
Lawson Agr. Man. 82. 1834. Grotto, or Mossy-podded. 46. 
Gard. Chron. 333. 1848. Oyster pea. 47. Ibid. 755. 1843. 
Shillings new early Grotto; and 373. 1844. Shilling's Grotto. 48. 
Warren's Gard. & Nurs. Car. 1845. New Grotto Marrow, Skillings 
Early Marrow. 49. Thorburn Car. 1847. Early Grotto. 50. 
Lawson Agr. Man. 73. 1834. Carolina. 51. Ibid. 81. 1834. 
Wellington. 52. Hort. Reg. 3:241. 1834. New Dwarf Pea, Pro- 
lific Isle of France. 53. Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836. Donn's 

Donne's) New Branching Marrow. 54. Jour. Hort. Soc. Lon- 
don, 4:271. 1849. Dwarf Branching Marrow, Grimstone's Egyp- 



tian. 55. Gard. Chron. 923. 1858. Kite's Branching Marrow. 
56. Florist 300. 1860. Branching Victoria, Paul's Prolific. 57. 
Cor. Garo*. 25:291. 1861. Paul's Early Dwarf. 58. Jour. Hort. 
48:380. 1872. Victoria Branching. 59. Rogers Veg. Cult. 229. 
1839. Royal Victoria. 60. Gard. Chron. 66. 1844. Victoria 
Marrow. 61. Hovey Car. 1859. Victoria Tall Marrowfat. 62. 
Jour. Hort. 1:29. 1861. Gibb's Defiance, Waterloo Marrow, 
Giant Marrow (as 5 first, 51, 59). 63. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 26:99. 
1898. Thurston's Reliance. 64. Denaiffe L.P.P. 1906. A la 
moelle de Victoria, Sarry, De Prusse. 65. Gard. Chron. 344. 
1845. American Marrow. 66. Ibid. 2. 1846:542. 1847; and 115. 
1849 (as 34, second and 33, last.) 67. Rural N. Y. 33:265. 1874. 
Andersonian Mummy. 68. Gard. Chron. 798. 1845. Dancer's 
Monastery. 69. Rural N. Y. 47:558. 1888. Aroostook Marrow- 
fat. 70. Gard. Chron. 661, 819. 1852. Paradise Marrow; 465" 
1857. Excelsior Marrow; 508. 1858. Mein's Paradise; 1017. 1859. 
Early Paradise Marrow; 21. 1860. Champion of Paris. 71. Cor. 
Gard. 25:291. 1861. Excelsior, Knight's Excelsior, Stuart's Para- 
dise. 72. Gard. Chron. 925. 1867. Giant Early Marrow. 73. 
Ibid. 1129. 1861. Princess Royal; and 925. 1867. Cattell's Kent 
Rival. 74. (as 20). 75. Amer. Agr. 20:260. 1861. Great East- 
ern. 76. Country Gent. 20:127. 1862. Good's New Marrow. 
77. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 14:75. 1873. Leopold II 78. Ms. notes 
N. Y. Sta. 1886. Erfurt Early Dwarf White Marrow. 79. Ann. 
Hort. 124. 1889. Short Straw Marrow. 80. Gregory Car. 1890. 
Marblehead Early Marrowfat. 81. BurpeeCaf. 1917. Marblehead 
Marrowfat. 82. Ms. notes N. Y. Sta. 1886. Giant Podded Mar- 
row. 83. Amer. Gard. 19:202. 1898. Improved Stratagem. (?). 
81. S. Dak. Bui. 91:7. 1905. Improved Sugar Marrow. 85. Tait. 
Car. 1914. Improved White Sugar Marrowfat. 86. J. Bolgiano 
Car. 1914. Improved Sugar Marrowfat. 87. Buckbee Car. 1913. 
Mammoth Podded Sugar Marrowfat. 88. Moore & Simon Car. 
1907. Early Sugar Marrowfat. 88a. California Car. 1913. Cali- 
fornia Marrowfat. 89. Carter Car. 1913. Springtide. 90. Allan 
Car. 1913. White-eyed Marrowfat. 91. Fuller, Stacy, Blackwell, 
Car. 1688 (rptd. in Gard. Chron.. 24 (3d ser.): 107. 1898). (As 
2). 92. Lawson Agr. Man. 74. 1834. Large Egg, Bean. 93. 
Amer. Gard. Mag. 2:431. 1836. Funnel's Black-spotted. 94. 
Gard. Chron. 52. 1850. Patagonian. 95. Ibid. 1017. 1859. 
Black-eyed Susan. 96. Switzer, Stephen Car. 1731. (rptd. in Gard. 
Chron. (3d ser.) 21:89. 1898). Spanish Mulatto. 97. Mawe- 
Abercrombie Univ. Gard. Bot. : Pisum. 1778. Spanish Moratto. 

98. Lindley Guide Orch. Gard. 567. 1831. Spanish Morotto. 

99. Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836. Spanish Marotta, A ceil noir, 
Michaux a ceil noir, Tall Black-spotted Marotta, Blackspotted. 100. 
Rogers Cult. 231. 1839. Spanish Marotto. 101. Switzer Stephen, 
Car. 1731. (rpt. Gard. Chron. (3dser.l 24:89. 1898). Nonsuch, or 
Pearl. 102. McMahon Amer. Gard. Cal. 582. 1806. Nonesuch. 
103. Hort. Reg. 3:212. 1834. Tall Black Rouncival, Clematow 
carre feve. 104. Douglas Car. 1843. New Dwarf Green None- 
such. 105. Dunlap 65 Thompson Car. 1847. Woodford Marrow 
(incorrectly). 106. White, J. Cat. 1846. Large Black-eyed Mar- 
rowfat. 107. Rural N. Y. 10:59. 1854. Black-eye. 108. U. S. 
Pat. Off. Rpt. (Agr.) 1865. Black Eye Marrowfat. 109. Gard. 
Chron. 509. 1882(2). Symes' Black Eyed Marrowfat. 110. N. Y. 
Sta. Rpt. 3: 242. 1884. Black Eyed Marrow, Black Eyed Marrow- 
fat. 111. Landreth Cat. 1885. Peruvian Black Eye Marrowfat. 
112. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Peruvian Black Eye Marrow. 113. 
Cor. Gard. 25:232. 1861. Telegraph. 



ALASKA 

1. Parkinson Par. Ter. 522. 1629. Green Hastings, Rounci- 
vals. 2. Mawe-Abercrombie Univ. Gard. Bot.: Pisum. 1778. 
Green Nonpareil. 3. Hort. Reg. 3:208. 1834. Blue Prussian, 
Nain Royal, Nain vert petite, Fine Long Podded Dwarf, Dwarf 
Blue Prussian, Early Dutch Green, Early Green, Green Prussian. 
4. Lawson Agr. Man. 97. 1834. Woodford's Green Marrow, 
Nonpareil. 5. Booth Cat. 1810. Royal Blue Prussian. 6. 
Thompson Gard. Asst. 321. 1859. Blue Prolific, Green Prolific, 
Blue Union. 7. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 442. 1883. Nain 
vert gros, Bleu, (as 3, first). 8. Denaiffe L.P.P. 76. 1906. 
Nain vert Imperial, Grune Prussiche. 9. Central Exptl. Farm 
(Canada) Bui. 36:16. 1900. Prussian Blue. 10. Gard. Chron. 
103, 329. 1841; and 620. 1842. Groom's Superb Dwarf Blue, 
Groom's Superb Early Dwarf Blue. 11. Russell Car. 1827. New 
Nonpareil Marrowfat. 12. U. S. Dept. Agr., B. P. I. Bui. 
21:280, 287. 1903. (As 4 second), Extra Early Nonpareil. 13. 
Landreth Car. 1824. Grand Imperial. 11. Ibid. 1832. Blue 
Imperial. 15. Hort. Reg. 3: 208. 1834. (As 14, name). Imperial, 
Tall Green Imperial, Dwarf Green Imperial, Dwarf Imperial, 
Sumatra Dwarf Blue Imperial, New Long-podded Imperial, Sans 
Parchemin vert (undoubtedly incorrect), Scymetar, Dwarf Blue 
Marrow, New Dwarf Prolific, New Sabre, Blue Sabre, Blue 
Scymetar, New Improved Dwarf Imperial, Dwarf Sabre, Sabre. 



GROUP 

16. Denaiffe L. P. P. 75. 1906. X la Reine, Bleu a courte tige. 

17. Gard. Chron. 344. 1845. Bedman's Imperial. 18. Mcintosh 
Bk. Gard. 2:56. 1855. Bedman's Dwarf Imperial. 19. Dunlap 
& Thompson Car. 1847. Knight's New Imperial. 20. Amer. 
Agr. 28:45. 1869. Imperial Blue. 21. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 
3:181. 1888. Imperial Dwarf Blue. 22. Lawson Agr. Man. 
79. 1834. (As 4). 23. Hovey Car. 1834-5. Woodford's New 
Tall Prolific. 2-1. Rogers Veg. Cult. 228. 1851. Nonsuch. 25. 
Douglas Car. 1843. Woodford New. 26. Jour. Hort. 1:63. 
1861. Woodford's Marrow. 27. Gard. Chron. 713. 1841. 
Flack's Victory, Flack's New Large Victoria. 28. Thorburn Car. 
1847. Flack's Improved Imperial. 29. Jour. Hort. 1:116. 1861. 
Flack's Imperial, Flack's Victoria. 30. Gard. Chron. 713. 1841. 
Flack's Dwarf Blue Victory. 31. Mag. Hort. 11:136. 1845. 
Flack's Dwarf Victory. 32. Country Gent. 9:75. 1857. June. 
33. Michell Car. 1902. Early June. 31. Gard. Chron. 1497, 
1500. 1870. Eastes' Kentish Invicta. 35. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:256. 1885. East's Kentish Invicta. 36. Denaiffe L.P.P. 140. 
1906. Kentish Invicta, East Kentish Invicta. 37. Gard. Chron. 
1544. 1871. Griffin. 38. Ibid. n. ser. 16:1264. 1871. Carter 
Invicta. 39. Ibid. 934. 1872. First Crop Blue. 40. Ibid. n. ser. 
16:666. 1881. Laxton's Earliest of All. 41. Letter J. T. More- 
land (Pres., Geo. Tait & Sons), Dec. 14, 1922. Victor. 12. Gard. 



REFERENCES. NAMES AND SYNONYMS 



119 



Chron. n.ser. 20:651. 1883. Harrison's Eclipse. Y.i. Rural N. Y. 
44:543. 1885. Smilax. 44. Gard. Chron n. ser. 22:377. 1884. 
First and Earliest, Cleveland's. 15. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:256. 1884. 
Express. 16. Rural N. Y. 44:756. 1885. Alaska. 47. Denaiffe 
L.P.P. 139. 1906. Blue Alaska. Ut. Darling & Beahan Car. 
1913. Improved Alaska. 49. Steckler Car. 1917. Early Alaska. 

50. Notes taken at N. Y. Station, 1886. Maule's Earliest of All. 

51. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 25:103. 1886. Earliest Blue. 52. 
Rural N. Y. 45:415. 1886. Clipper. 53. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:531. 

1888. Advance. 54. Rural N. Y. 47: 113. 1888. Blue Beauty. 
55. Kans. Sta. Rpt. 258. 1888. McBeth's Pride. 56. Ann. 
Hort. 124. 1889. McBeth's Bride. 57. Kans. Sta. Rpt. 156. 

1889. Sitka. 58. Dreer Caf. 1899. Electric, Extra Early 
"Electric." 59. Salzer Caf. 1900. Scorcher. 60. Gard. Chron. 



3rd ser. 30:6. 1901. Le Rapide. 61. Johnson & Stokes Cat. 
1903. Large-podded Alaska. 63. Mich. Seed Co. Caf. 1906. 
Saginaw Valley's Pride. 61. Rice Cafs. Rice's No. 330. 65. 
Iowa Caf. 1909. Velocity, Cooper's Velocity. 66. Bolgiano, 
J. Caf. 1910. Long-pod Alaska. 67. Allan Cat . 1913^4. Allan's 
Concordia. 68. Barnard Caf. 1913. Goodwin's Prize-winner. 
69. Bolgiano, J. Caf. 1910. Hustlers, The. 70. Wis. Sta. Bui. 
382:13-15. 1926. Horal. 71. Tinsley Cat . 1911. Indianapolis 
Market. 72. Moore Seed Co. Cat. 1913. McLean's First of All. 
73. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 37:411. 1911; and 41:284. 1915. 
Giant Express, Giant Blue Express. 74. U. S. Dept. Agr., B. P. I. 
Bui. 21:278. 1903. Earliest Perfection. 75. Dreer Cat. 1911. 
Market Surprise. 



SCIMITAR GROUP 



1. Fuller, Stacy. Blackwell, Caf. 1688. Sickle. 2. Lawson 
Agr. Man. 73. 1834. White Sickle. 3. Ibid. 75. 1834. Blue 
Scimetar. 4. Gard. Chron. 65. 1854. Blue Scimiter. 5. Thomp- 
son Gard. Asst. 320. 1859. Sabre, Blue Sabre, Dwarf Sabre, 
New Sabre (.all probably incorrect, as Sabre is an incurved, not a 
recurved pea). 6. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 524. 1863. Blue 
Cimeter, Beck's Eclipse. 7. Bon. Jard. 269. 1832. D'Auvergne, 
d'Auverigny. 8. Barrett Caf. 1836. Dwarf Scymetar. 9. 
Rogers Veg. Cult. 28. 1839. Scymetar-podded. 10. Gard. 
Chron. 713. 1841. Auvergne. 11. Ibid. 66. 1844. Scimetar. 
12. Dunlap 8b Thompson Caf. 1847. Cimeter or (as 1). 13. 
Cof. Gard. 25:260. 1861. White Sabre, White Scimetar. 14. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:257. 1885. Serpette, Cosaque, Crochu. 15. 
Denaiffe L.P.P. 125. 1906. Crochublanc, Faucille, French Canner. 
16. Thorburn Caf. 1892. Petit Pois. Small Early French. 17. 
Dreer Caf. 1894. (12, first) = French Canner. 17a. Breck Cat. 
1913 (12, first )= Clamart hatif. 18. Carter Amer. Cat. 1923 
(12, first) — Delicatesse. 19. Vilmorin-Robinson Veg. Gard. 502. 



1900. Long-podded Improved Scimetar. 20. Carter Caf. 1925. 
Giant Delicatesse. 21. Gard. Chron. 508. 1858. Banksian 
Marrow. 22. Ibid. 1017. 1859. Batts Wonder. 23. Country 
Gent. 20:207. 1862. Blue Sickle. 21. Garo*. Chron. 172. 
1866. Carter's Surprise, Flack's Imperial. 25. Gard. Chron. 
711. 1867. Laxton's Supreme. 26. N. Y. Sta. Rpts. 3:245. 
1885. Auvergne Green, Serpette vert, Griine Auvergne: and 
4:186. 1886. Green Auvergne. 27. Gard. Chron. 1612. 1871. 
Evergreen. 28. Gard. Chron. 1280. 1869. Carter's Hundred- 
fold, Cook's Favorite. 29. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les. PI. Pot. 431. 
1883. Merveille d'Etampes. 30. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:252. 1885. 
Etampes Wonder. 31. Haage& Schmidt. Caf. 1886. Ruhm von 
Cassel. 32. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 5:248. 1887. Glory of Cassel. 
33. Northrup Caf. 1892. Sapphire. 34. Haage 8s Schmidt Caf. 
1899. Gold von Blocksburg. 35. Kelway Caf. 1919. Early 
Somerset. 36. Lawson Agr. Man. 76. 1834. Blue Spanish 
Dwarf. 37. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 5:248. 1887. Sword, White Sword, 
Sabre, Beak, and Green Sword, Sabre or Beak. 



DIMPLED^EEDED GROUP 



I. Hort. Reg. 3:243. 1834. Tall Green Marrow, New Large 
Green Marrow, Valley Field, Imperial Green Marrow, South Sea. 
2. Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836. Green Tall Marrow. 3. Thomp- 
son Gard. Asst. 321. 1859. Late Green Marrow. 4. Florist 
301. 1860. Denyer's Early Prolific Green Marrow, Sutton's Berk- 
shire Hero, Garbutt's Amazon. 5. Gard. Chron. 292. 1865. 
Denyer's Early Prolific. 6. Gard. Chron. 818. 1842. Improved 
Green Marrow. 7. Lawson Agr. Man. 79. 1834. Early Green 
Marrowfat. 8. Ibid. 76. 1834. Groom's New Superb, Blue 
Dwarf. 9. Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836. Groom's Superb Blue, 
Groom's Superb Dwarf Blue. 10. Rogers Veg. Cult. 228, 229. 
1839. Groom's Superb Dwarf Blue Spanish Dwarf. 11. Gard. 
Chron. 103, 329. 1841; 620. 1842; 66. 1844. Groom's Superb 
Early Dwarf Blue, Groom's Superb. 12. Jour. Hort. 1 : 62. 1861. 
Blue Fan. 13. Gard. Chron. 769. 1846. Early Green Marrow. 
14. Ibid. 8. 1847. Green Wrinkled Marrow. 15. Ibid. 1017. 
1859. New Green Marrow. 17. Ibid. 17. 1849. Bellamy's 
Early Green Marrow. 18. Amer. Gard. Mag. 15:156. 1849. 
Burbidge's Eclipse. 19. Gard. Chron. 18. 1850. Burbige's 
Eclipse. 20. Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 2 : 56. 1855. Burbage's Eclipse. 
21. Gard. Chron. 66. 1844. Stubbs' New Dwarf. 22. Ibid. 
673. 1849. Stubbs' Early Dwarf Blue Marrow. 23. Ibid. 508. 
1858. Stubbs' Blue Marrow. 24. Jour. Hort. 1:116. 1861. 
Stubb's Dwarf. 25. Gard. Chron. 68. 1850. Gros vert Nor- 
mande. 26. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:245. 1885. Large Green Nor- 
mandy. 27. Gard. Chron. 834. 1854. Prizetaker. 28. Ibid. 
1017. 1859. Beck's Prizetaker, Prizetaker Green Marrow, Rising 
Sun. 29. Jour. Hort. (Cot. Gard.) 1:29. 1861. Leicester Defi- 
ance. 30. Gard. Chron. 292. 1865. Bellamy's Green Marrow, 
(as 29), or Noble's Green Marrow. 31. Ibid. 925. 1867. Green 
Prolific, Grotto. 32. Ibid. 488. 834. 1854. 1017. 1859. Dick- 
son's Favorite, Dickson's Early Favorite, Torwoodlee. 32a. Hogg 
Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:74. 1873. Dickson's Favorite Improved, The 
Wonder, Cottrell's Wonder. 33. Ibid. 832. 1855. Harrison's 
Glory, Harrison's Perfection. 31. Ibid. 770, 832. 1855. Den- 
yer's New Prolific Green Marrow, Denyer's Early Marrow. 35. 
Ibid. 292. 1865. Denyer's Early Prolific, (as 1, first). 36. 
Gard. Chron. 771. 1856. Semi-smooth-seed, (as 28, last). 37. 
F7or/sf301. 1860. (as 17). 38. Gard. Chron. 1. 1857. (as 4, 
last). 39. Jour. Hort. 1:62. 1861. (as 4, first). 10. Gard. 
Chron. 487. 1857. Glory. 41. Ibid. 17. 1858. Gilson's Glory. 
42. Ibid. 1017. 1859. las 29). 13. Ibid. 50, 1017. 1859. Sut- 
ton's Berkshire Hero. 11. Florist 301. 1860. (as 1, first). 45. 
Gard. Chron. 1017. 1859. Competitor. 46. Florist 301. 1860. 
Tall Green Wrinkled Mammoth. 47. Gard. Chron. 734. 1867. 
Tall Green Mammoth. 48. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 544. 1863. 
Noble's Early Green Marrow. 49. Gard. Chron. 5. 1864. Har- 
rison's Royal Blue. 50. Ibid. 1151. 1865. Laxton's Prolific 
Early Long-pod. 51. Ibid. 925. 1867. Laxton's Prolific Long- 
pod. 52. Evans Caf. 1868. Laxton's Prolific. 53. Amer. Jour. 
Hort. 5:280. 1869. Laxton's Early Prolific Long-pod. 53a. 
Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:80. 1873. Laxton's Prolific Selected. 



51. Gard. Chron. 660. 1868. William the First. 55. N. Y. Sta. 
Rpt. 3:257. 1885. Laxton's William the First, A grain rond vert 
William. 56. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 2:618. 1887. William the 
Conqueror. 57. Ibid. 660. 1868. Leader. 58. Jour. Hort. 
48:400. 1872. Blue Peter. 59. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:266. 1885. 
McLean's Blue Peter, Peter, Blue Tom Thumb. 60. Gard. Chron. 
1199. 1872. Fillbasket. 61. Ibid. 1662. 1873. Laxton's Fill- 
basket. 62. Denaiffe L.P.P. 69. 1906. Plein-le-Panier. 63. Moore 
8&SimonCaf. 1907. Simon's Fillbasket. 64. Garo". Chron. 134. 
1878. Culverwell's Telegraph. 65. Rural N. Y. 12:288. 1883. 
Telegraph. 66. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:136. 1889. Long Island Mam- 
moth. 67. LandrethCaf. 1893. Main Crop, Long Island Marrow- 
fat. 68. Allan Caf. 1914. Improved Telegraph. 69. Jour. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. 36:722. 1910. New Telegraph. 70. Kelway Cat. 
1922. Super Telegraph, Early Telegraph. 71. Gard. Chron. 134. 
1878. Carter's Challenger. 72. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:244. 1885. Chal- 
lenger. 73. Gard. Chron. 612. n. ser. 1880. Early Sunrise. 71. 
Rural N. Y. 40. 498. 1881. Day's Early Sunrise. 75. Gard. 
Chron. 19 or 20 (n. ser.): 20. 1883. Day's Sunrise. 76. Jour. 
Hort. 33dser.:82. 1881. Pride of the Market. 77. Gard. Chron. 
107. 1883. Gladiator. 78. RuralN. Y. 44:496. 1885. Atlantic. 
79. Ibid, n.ser. 18:807. 1882. Laxton's Evolution. 80. Henderson 
Caf. 1892. Evolution. 81. Gard. Chron., n.ser. 22:340. 1884. 
Early Bird. 82. Gard. Chron., 3rd ser. 2:619. 1887. Keniiworth. 
83. Hogg Gard. Yr.Bk. 11:89. 1873. Green Noyou (Noyon). 84. 
N.Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:267. 1885. Dwarf Green St. Michael. 85. Garo*. 
Chron.n. ser. 24:181. 1885. Ameer. 86. Alexander Caf. 1911. 
Large-podded Alaska. 87. Allan Cat. 1914. Long-podded Alaska. 
88. Farmer Cat. 1914. Large Alaska. 89. Buckbee Caf. 1918. 
Bountiful. 90. Buist Caf. 1922. Claudit. 91. Denaiffe L.P.P. 
142. 1906. Emir. 92. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 25:64. 1886. 
British Lion. 92a. Marshall Cafs. Lion. 93. Gard. Chron. 3rd 
ser. 3:6. 1888. Early William. 91. Ibid. 181. 1888. Imperial 
Dwarf Blue. 95. Angell Caf. 1892. Early Prize. 96. Garc7. 
Chron. 3rd ser. 10:183. 1891. (As 89), Sutton's Bountiful. 
97. S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:4. 1904. Early Bountiful. 98. 
Denaiffe L.P.P. 142. 1906. Bountiful Early. 99. Moore Seed 
Co. Cat. 1913. Bountiful Big Pod. 100. Gard. Chron. 3rd 
ser. 16:135. 1894. Yorkshire. 101. Daniels Caf. 1892. Lye's 
Favorite. 102. Squier Ore. 1900. (as 90). 103. U. S. Dept. Agr., 
B. P.I. Bui. 21:286. 1903. May Queen. 104. Griffith 8s Turner 
Caf. 1902. Dwarf Green Wrinkled Marrow. 105. Breck Caf. 
1913. Old Glory. 106. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 34:289. 1908. 
Pilot. 107. Ibid. 37:417. 1911. Primo. 108. Kelway Caf. 
1922. PrimoPilot. 109. Hurst Cat . 1925. (As 107,) or (as 106). 

110. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 46:387. 1921. Improved Pilot. 

111. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 36:107. 1904. Carter's Eight 
Weeks. 112. Farmer Cat. 1914. Early Eight Weeks. 113. 
Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 29:681. 1905. EssexStar. 114. Denaiffe 
L.P.P. 73. 1906. Sunrise Blue, Carters. 115. Schultz Caf. 
1908. Wonderful Extra Early. 116. Noll Caf. 1907. Grand 
Monarch. 117. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 31:289. 1908. Inter- 



120 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



national. 118. Livingston Cat. 1908. Frost King. 119. Baker's 
Cat. 1912. Acquisition. 120. Sutton Cat. 1914. Sutton's 
Acquisition. 121. Sharpe Cat. (Aut.) 1910. Talisman. 122. 
L c. Vanguard. 123. Tinsley Cat. 1911. Twentieth Century 
Giant. 121. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 37:420. 1911. Superb. 
12.>. Carter Cat. 1925. Carter's Early Superb. 126. Weeber 
Car 1913. Early Marvel. 12T. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 39:682. 
1913. Eldorado. 128. Ibid. 677. 1913. Benefactor. 129. Kel- 
way. Letter. May 26, 1926. Old England. 130. Simon Car. 
1915. Early Record. 131. Bolgiano, F. W. Car. 1915. Earliest 
Springtime. 132. Ibid. 1924. Early Springtime. 133. Jour. 
Roy. Hort. Soc. 43:511. 1918. Johnson's Victor. 131. Ibid. 
18:87. 1923. Victor. 135. Burpee Car. 1917. Despatch. 136. 



Stark Bros. Car. 1921. Burpee's Extra Early Dispatch. 137. 
Kelway Car. 1919. The Britisher. 138. L. c. Kelway Beauty. 
139. Bolgiano, J. Caf. 1890. Morning Glory. 1 10. Grown at 
Idaho Sta. 1921. Warrior. 1 H. Schell Caf. 1924. Wonderful. 
112. Kelway Caf . 1922. Councillor, (received as Kelway's Coun- 
sellor). 113. L. c. Tip Top. lit. Buist Caf. 1922. Early Klon- 
dike. 115. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 17:88. 1922. Johnson's 
Glory. 116. Hurst Caf. 1923. Welcome. 117. AlneerCaf. 1922. 
Mammoth Extra Early. 1 tit. Williams Caf. 1923. WorldBeater. 
119. Charlton's Radio. 150. Maule, Burpee, Caf s. 1924. Radio. 
151. Hurst Caf. 1923. Ajax. 152. Western Caf. 1923. Hart- 
ner's Early Market (= Pilot). 153. Henderson Cat. 1926. 
Jubilant. 



WRINKLED, CREAM SEEDED GROUP 



1. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 11:617. 1880. Minimum. 2. 
Gregory Caf. 1882. Laxton's Minimum. 3. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
Jour. 16:386. 1921. Mighty Atom. 1. Sutton Caf. 1898. Sut- 
ton's Harbinger. 5. Rural N. Y. 62:486. 1903. Harbinger. 6. 
Isbell Caf. 1914. Perfect Early. 7. Sutton Cat. 1908. Reading 
Wonder. 8. Clibran Caf. 1924. Masterpiece. 9. Gard. Chron. 
1612. 1870. White Gem. 10. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:95. 1873. 
Nutting's No. 1. 11. Rennie Caf. 1917. Earliest Table Marrow. 
12. Thorburn Caf. 1909. Germania. 13. Gard. Chron. 734. 
1867. Nelson's Vanguard. 11. Sutton Caf. 1887; also Gard. 
Chron. 3rd ser. 1:18. 1887: 3rd ser. 1:46. 1888. Chelsea Gem. 
15. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. Chelsea. 16. Hurst Cat. 1919. Chel- 
sea Rival. 17. Jour. Hort. 18:379. 1872. Laxton's Nabob. 18. 
Kelway Cat. 1919. Referendum. 19. L. c. Allotment Holder. 
20. Marlow Cat. 1913. Delicia or Delicatessen. 21. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. Jour. 39:690. 1913. Marvellous. 22. Laxton Caf. 1920. 
as 21). 23. Ibid. 1925. Marvellous Improved. 21. Sutton Cat. 
1906. Sutton's Pioneer. 25. Buist Caf. 1922. Dwarf Pioneer. 
26. Sutton Cat. 1910. Sutton's Hundredfold. 27. Breck Caf. 
1923. Early Lexington. 28. Williams Caf. 1918. New Era. 
29. Henderson Caf. 1905. Melting Marrow. 30. Sutton Caf. 
1896. Sutton's Early Giant. 31. Ibid. 1895. Sutton's Seedling 
Marrowfat. 32. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 10:133. 1891. Carter's 
Daisy. 33. Rural N. Y. 55:483. 1896. Daisy. 31. Gregory 
Caf. 1897. Carters Up-to-Date Pea (not intended as name, but 
so used in Rural N. Y. 55:483. 1896L 35. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 
29:682. 1905. Extra Early Daisy. 36. Bolgiano, J. Caf. 1911. 
Dwarf Telephone. 37. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 18:86. 1923. 
Improved Daisy. 38. Lincoln Circ, undated. The Lincoln. 39. 
Thorburn Cat. 1908. Lincoln. 10. Allan Cafs. Allan's Canner. 
11. Isbell Cat. 1912. Isbell's Beauty. 12. Johnson & Stokes 
Cat. 1896. Crown Prince. 13. Gard. Chron. 21:265. 1884. 
White Prolific Marrow. 14. Vaughan Caf. 1900. Sweet Market. 
45. Vick Caf. 1920. First Choice. 46. Bolgiano, J. Caf. 1906. 
Wonder Worker. t7. Gard. Chron. 40. 1862. McLean's Won- 
derful. 48. Ibid. 172. 1866. Carter's Prince of Wales, Princess, 
Yorkshire Hero. 49. Ann. Hort. 194. 1891. Admiral. 50. Rogers 
Cafs. Green Admiral. 51. Gard. Chron. 344. 1845. Lynn's 
Wrinkled Marrow, Black-eyed Susan. 52. Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 
2:56. 1855. Lynn's Prolific, Lynn's Prolific Wrinkled Marrow. 
53. Gard. Chron. 1017. 1859. Lynn's Prolific Wrinkled. 51. 
Ibid. 2. 1860. McLean's Prolific. 55. Ibid. 96. 1873. James' 
Prolific Wrinkled Marrow. 56. Sutton Caf. 1898. Prolific Mar- 
row. 57. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:279. 1901. Prolific. 58. 



Ibid. 27:206. 1902. Gradus. 59. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 12: 
667. 1892. Laxton's Gradus. 60. Henderson Cafs. 1897. " 1897," 
1898. Prosperity. 61. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:273. 1901. 
Dwarf Gradus. 62. Gard. Chron. 835. 1856. Alliance. 63. 
Ibid. 802. 1856. Eugenie. 61. Ibid. 105. 1858. Early Eugene. 
65. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:254. 1885. Eugenia. 66. Denaiffe LP. P. 
81. 1906. Ride nain blanc hatif, d'Alber sucre, White Eugenie. 
67. Gard. Chron. 1257. 1868. Carter's Leviathan. 68. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:273. 1901. Edward VII. 69. Carter Caf. 
1913. Carter's Edward VII. 70. Gard. Chron. 49. 1847. In- 
comparable Marrow. 71. Ibid. 134. 1850. Ward's Incomparable. 
Green's Superb Tall Marrow. 72. Ibid. 169. 1848. British 
Queen. 73. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:100. Hay's Mammoth, Tall 
White Mammoth, as 67', Will Watch, Waite's Will Watch, Cham- 
pion of Scotland. 71. Florisf.301. 1860. Tall Mammoth, Green's 
Superb, Cotton's Leviathan, Flannigan's Imperial, Great Britain, 
Royal Britain, Thome's Royal Britain, Oxford Tom, Norfolk Marrow, 
Shanley Marrow, (as 67, first), Rollison's Victoria. 75. Gard. 
Chron. 3rd ser. 2t:99. 1898. Hurst's Incomparable. 76. 
Sutton Caf. 1901. Duchess of York. 77. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. 
Burpee's Profusion. 78. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 11:708. 1881. 
Yorkshire Gem. 79. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 39:685. 1905. Prestige, 
given Award of Merit 1901 as Prolific Late Marrow. 80. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 27 :207. 1902. RoyalSalute. 81. Gard. Chron. 
3. 1859. as 69, last). 82. Jour. Hort. 1:138. 1861. las 69, last), 
(as 69, secondi, (as 67, first). 83. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 39:685. 
1913. Glory of Somerset. 81. Moore Seed Co. Cat. 1909. Royal 
Early. 85. Gard. Chron. 292. 1865. Prince of Wales. 86. 
Jour. Hort. 52:78. 1874. Standish's Criterion. 87. Gard. 
Chron. 707. 1853. Fairbeard's Nonpareil. 88. Ibid. 1283. 1868. 
Queen of the Marrows. 89. Veitch, J. Caf. 1907. Earliest Marrow. 
90. Kelway Cat. 1913. Langport. 91. Gard. Chron. 53. 1842. 
British Queen. 92. Florist 301. 1860. Carter's Victoria. 93. 
Gard. Chron. 925. 1867. Hooper's Incomparable, Wonder, Cat- 
tell's Wonder. 91. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:96. 1873. Hair's 
Defiance, Erin's Queen, as 69a, fifth, seventh, ninth, last!. Imperial 
Wonder, (as 63 I, McMillan's Queen of the Marrows, William's 
Emperor of the Marrows, Wonder of the World, Queen of the 
Marrows. 95. Ibid. n. ser. 21:19. 1884. St. Peter's Marrow, St. 
Heliers Marrow, as 91). 96. Gard. Chron. 1017. 1859. Syno- 
nyms of Carter's Victoria 92 : Carter's Eclipse, (as 74, seventh), 
Buckley's Gen. Windham. 97. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. Appar- 
ently 81. 98. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 39.694. 1913. Sir Arthur 
Bignold. 99. Gard. Chron. 1576. 1871. Emperor of Marrows. 



GEM GROUP 



1. Gard. Chron. 40. 1862. McLean's Little Gem. 2. Kans. Sta. 
Rpt. 1:153. 1889. Vaughan's Little Gem. 3. Mag. Hort. 33:81. 
1867. Drew's New Dwarf. 4. Rural N. Y. 38:464. 1879; 12:488. 
1883; 51:214. 1892. Bliss' American Wonder. 5. Simon-Louis 
Freres Caf . 1923. American Wonder Long-pod. 6. Gard. Chron. 
216. 1876. The Shah. 6a. Denaiffe LP. P. 160. 1906. Shah de 
Persie. 7. Country Gent. 12:150. 1877. Extra Early Premium 
Gem. 8. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 1:86. 1883. Premium Gem. 9. Ibid. 
3:268. 1885. Carter's Premium Gem, as 7). 10. Darling 1923. 
Darling's Gem. 11. Berry Seed Co. Caf. 1925, and letter, Feb. 
18, 1927. Magnificent. 12. Gard. Chron. 18:807. 1882. William 
Hurst. 13. Ferry Caf. 1893. (as 12). 11. Denaiffe LP. P. 43. 
1906. Serpette nain vert, Laxton's. 15. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:138. 
1889. Station. 16. RuralN. Y. 13:97. 1884. Arnold No. 2, Ever- 
bearing Bliss'i. 17. N. Y. Sta. Rpf. 3:260. 1884. Bliss' Ever- 
bearing. 18. Childs Caf. 1893. Child's Universal. 19. N. Y. Sta. 
Rpf. 3:268. 1885. Very Dwarf Wrinkled, Ride tres nain a bor- 
dures. 20. Rural N. Y. 13:544. 1884. Vermont Wonder. 21. 
Ann. Hort. 125. 1889. Vermont Wonder Gem. 22. RuralN. Y. 
13:544. 1884. Vick's Dwarf. 23. Ibid. 11:463. 1885. Alexander's 
Cable. 21. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 5:248. 1887. Sutton's Early Gem. 
25. Vick Caf. 1892. King of the Dwarfs, Vick's. 26. Sutton Caf. 
1903. King ofthe Dwarfs, Sutton's. 27. Ibid. 1887. ChelseaGem. 
215. Gregory Caf. 1888. Delicious. 29. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. 
Epicure. 30. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 6:743. 1889. The Echo. 



31. Sutton Cat. 1889. Perfect Gem, Sutton's. 32. Vaughan Caf. 
1908. Perfect Gem, Vaughan's. 33. Kans. Sta. Rpt. 1:153. 
1889. Tom Thumb (wrinkled i. 31. Moore Seed Co. Caf. 1907. 
Tom Thumb Plentiful. 35. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 9:293. 1891. Angel's 
(sic) Premier. 36. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 10:18, 694. 1891. 
English Wonder. 37. Ann. Hort. 194. 1891. Nott's Excelsior. 
38. Angell Caf. 1892. Angell's Triumph. 38a. Everitt Caf. 1900. 
Empire State. 38b. U. S. D. A., B. P. I. Bui. 21:280. 1903. Extra 
Early Manifold. 38c. Griffith and Turner Caf. 1902. Admiral 
Dewey. 39. Sutton Caf. 1896. May Queen. 10. Gard. Chron. 
3rd ser. 18:423. 1895. Witham Wonder. 11. RuralN. Y. 55:467. 
1896. Nott's Perfection. 12. Gregory Caf. 1897. Gregory's Sur- 
prise. 13. Burpee Caf. 1901. Eclipse or (as 15 1. 11. Hastings 
Caf. 1907, probably earlier. Extra Early Surprise, tla. Gregory 
Caf. 1898. ias43, first.) 15. Sutton Caf. 1900. Little Marvel. 
46. Alexander Seed Co. Cat. 1904. Durban's Market Garden. 
17. S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:5. 1904. The Herald. HI. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. Jour. 28:197. 1903. Rivenhall Wonder. 19. Buckbee Caf . 
1906. Extra Early Honey Sweet. 50. Gregory Caf. 1906. Early 
Excelsior. 51. Lilly Caf. 1907. Washington Wonder. 52. Vaughan 
Cat. 1908. Vaughan's Forcing. 53. Northrup Caf. 1907. Honey 
Sweets. 51. Allan Caf. 1913-14. Richard Seddon. 55. Bolgiano 
Cat. 1914. 100' , Profit. 56. Routledge Caf. 1918. Duke's 
Delight 57. Allan Cat. Recent). Canners' Gem. 



REFERENCES, NAMES AND SYNONYMS 



121 



LARGE PODDED DWARF GROUP 



POINTED-POD SECTION 

1. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 10:647. 1878. Marvel. 2. N. Y. 
Sta. notes. Green Prolific, Bennett's. 3. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 
1:1 28. 1887. Matchless Marrow. Daniels'. 1. Sutton Cat. 1896. 
Matchless Marrowfat. 5. Ibid. Cat. 1912. Matchless. (>. Allan 
Cats. 1907, 1913. Dwarf Telephone. Allan's. 7. Maule Cat. 
1905. Carter's Daisy. 8. Condon Car. 1918. Dwarf Defiance. 

9. Rice Cat. 1918. Rice's Improved Dwarf Telephone. 10. Western 
Car. 1923. Mountain Telephone. 11. Sutton Caf. 1896. Sutton's 
Perfection Marrowfat. 12. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 18:96. 1895. 
Rentpayer. 13. Sutton Caf. 1896. Productive Marrowfat. 1 1. 
Ibid. 1896. Sutton's Forcing. 15. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 22:111. 
1897. Early Mom. 16. Ibid. 3rd ser. 30: 111. 1901. Carter'sEarly 
Mom. 17. Burpee Caf. 1901. Perfect. 18. Gard. Chron. 3rd 
ser. 28:16. 1900. Edwin Becket. 19. Johnson & Stokes Caf. 1901. 
Market Master. 20. Salzer Caf. 1901. Dwarf Jumbo. 21. 
Sutton Cat. 1901. Green Gem. 22. Barr Caf. 1912. Mikado. 
2.'$. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:274. 1901. King Edward VII. 21. 
Carter Caf. 1913. King Edward VII Dwarf. 25. Northrup Caf. 
1901. Matchless Wonder. 26. Bolgiano, J. Cat. 1901. Dwarf 
Giant Podded Prolific Green Marrow. 27. Burpee Cat. 1904. 
Prolific. 28. Rural N. Y. 11:463. 1885. Alexander's Prolific. 
29. (See 93). 30. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 36:715. 1910; and 37:423, 
1911. Victor. 31. Breck Cat. 1913. Record, The. 32. Sutton 
Caf. 1907. World's Record. 33. Eckford Cat. 1906. Commander. 
31. Ebbert Cat. 1906. Peacemaker. 35. Field Cat. 1901. Leonard's 
Clatawa. 36. Johnson Seed Co. Caf. 1909. Dainty Duchess. 
37. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 12:114. 1907. Laxtonian. 38. Lilly 
Caf. 1907. Mount Ranier. 39. Sutton Cat . 1907. Pioneer, Sutton's. 

10. Ibid. 1910. Discovery, Sutton's. 41. Carter Cat. 1913. Early 
Duke. 12. Roy Hort. Soc. Jour. 16:386. 1921. Peter Pan. 
43. Ibid. 37:413.1911. Lancashire Lad. 11. Burpee 1912. Blue 
Bantam. 45. Farmer Caf. 1914. Giant Laxtonian, Dwarf Gradus. 
16. Buckbee Caf. 1918. tas 45, first). 47. Condon Caf. 1922. 
as 44, 45. 48. Darling Cat. 1913. Defiance. 49. Harnden Caf. 

1913. Electric. 50. Adams Caf. 1924. Adams' Electric. 51. 
Condon Caf. 1913. Little Midget. 52. Ibid. 1918. Mammoth 
Podded Little Midget. 53. Sharpe Caf. 1913. Marchioness. 51. 
Ford Cat. 1915. Harvester. 55. Elliott Nursery Cat. 1916. 
Early but Good. 56. Sutton Cat. 1919. President Wilson. 57. 
Tait Cat. 1922. Dwarf Perfection. 58. Laxton Caf. 1922. Progress, 
Laxton's. 59. Bruce Cat. 1922. Regal. 60. Laxton Cat. 1923. 
Bedford Champion. 61. Carter Caf. 1925. Giant Stride. 62. 
Breck Cat. 1926. Warlock Prize. 62a. Letter El Paso Seed Co., 
Apr. 23, 1927. El Paso Wonder. 



BLUNT -PODDED SECTION 

63. Gard. Chron. 743. 1844. Satisfaction, Sutton's. 61. 
Ibid. 292. 1865. Dwarf Prolific, McLean's. 65. Ibid. 1531. 1870. 
Best of All. McLean's. 66. Ibid. 1152. 1863. Yorkshire Hero. 

67. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:261. 1885. (Probably) Turner's Wonderful, 
Carter's Prince of Wales and Princess of Wales, McLean's Favorite. 

68. Northrup Cat. 1893. Big Gem. 69. Hallawell Caf. 1918. 
Alameda Sugar. 70. Morse Caf. 1918. Alameda Sweet. 71. 
Navlet Caf. 1918. Alameda Sweets. 72. Muzzy Caf. 1921. 
Dwarf Champion (incorrectly I. 73. Ferry Caf. 1882. Dwarf 
Champion. 71. Gregory Cat. 1885. (p. 6) Dwarf Champion of 
England idescribedl, (p. 35) (as 66) (listed, cross referenced p. 6). 
75. Dreer Caf. 1905. New Dwarf Champion. 76. Beckert Cat. 
1915. Juno. 77. Rural N. Y. 42:558. 1883. Horsford's Mar- 
ket Garden. 78. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 1:186. 1886. Imperial Cham- 
pion. 79. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 28:704. 1886. Sharpe's Queen. 
79a. Rennie Caf. 1901. Rennie's Queen. 80. Northrup, 1899. 
Queen. 81. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 28:677. 1886. Sensation. 82. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:134. 1889. Blue Wrinkled. 83. Ibid. 135. 
Dwarf Main Crop. 81. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 6:743. 1889. 
Renown. 85. Sutton Cat. 1895. Sutton's Favorite Marrowfat. 
86. Ibid. 1896. Sutton's Excelsior. 87. Grand Junction Caf. 
1924. Melting Marrow. 88. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 24:99. 1898. 
Pierrepont's Gem (incorrectly). 89. S. Dak. Sta. Bu/. 91: 7. 1905. 
Pierremont's Gem. 90. Sutton Caf. 1901. Sutton's Ideal. 91. 
Burpee Cat. 1904. British Wonder. 92. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 
20:202. 1883. Eckford's Victor. 93. Ibid. 3rd ser. 36: 108. 1904. 
Victor Marrowfat. 91. Isee 301. 95. Sutton Caf. 1908. Sut- 
ton's Incomparable. 96. Portland Cat. 1909. Perfection. 97. 
Vaughan Cat. 1909. Top o' th' Mom. 98. Sutton Cat. 1910. 
Early Dwarf. 99. Ibid. 1914. Prince Arthur. 100. Rice Caf. 
1918. Rice's Early Dwarf. 101. Sutton Caf. 1922. Reading 
Gem. 102. Salzer Caf. 1923. Record Breaker Six Weeks. 103. 
Grand Junction Caf. 1924. Bestever, Ward's. 

DAISY SECTION 

101. S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 85:4. 1904. (As 91). 105. Garo". 
Chron. 3rd ser. 36:107. 1904. Buttercup. 106. L. c, Mayflower. 
107. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 29:680. 1905. Daffodil. 108. Vick 
Caf. 1909. Swastika, " Good Luck." 109. Burnett Caf. 1913. 
Te Aroha. 110. Thorbum Cat. 1915. (As 108, second), (as 109). 
111. Routledge Caf. 1918. Te-a-wha (evidently typographical 
error). 112. Ferry Caf. 1918. Connoisseur. 113. Sutton 8s Sons 
Cat. 1921. Sutton's Supreme. 114. Griswold, T. Cat. 1922. 
Superb Early Dwarf. 



ADVANCER GROUP 



1. Gard. Chron. 2:1860. McLean's Advancer. 2. Ibid. 
292. 1865. Advancer. 3. Rice Caf. 1918. Improved Advancer. 
1. Gard. Chron. 117. 1864. Princess of Wales. 5. Ibid. 172. 
1866. 4) McLean's Favorite. 6. Ibid. 711. 1867. Alpha, Lax- 
ton's. 7. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:260. 1885. Early Alpha, Extra Early 
Alpha. Pois a grain ride vert. 8. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 4:144, 803. 
1875. Dr. McLean. 9. Sutton Caf. 1897. Improved Dr. McLean. 
10. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 16:708. 1881. Edinburg Beauty. 11. 
Gard. Chron. n. ser. 20:713. 1883. Bliss' Abundance. 12. Rice 
Caf. 1922. Canners' Perfection [often spoken of as Davis' Perfec- 
tion;. 13. Rural N. Y. 42:554. 1883. Racket, Horsford's. 11. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:263. 1885. The Racket. 15. Gard. Chron. 
3rd ser. 10:133. 1891. A 1. Sutton's. 16. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 



26:277. 1901. Exonian. 17. (As 5). 18. Gregory Cat. 1890. 
Favorite. 19. Burpee Cat. 1888. Quality, Burpee's; Quantity, 
Burpee's. 20. Ann. Hort. 194. 1891. The Mayor. 21. Rural 
N. Y. 58:498. 1899. Morning Star, Childs'. 22. Buckbee Caf. 
1894. Startler. U. S. D. A., B. P. I. Bui. 21:274. 1893. Bruces 
C. P. R. 23. Griffith & Turner Cat. 1902. Gardener's Favorite. 
21. Sutton Caf. 1906. Abundance. 25. Buckbee Caf. 1906. 
Vigorosa. 26. Hastings Cat. 1907. Home Delight. 27. Bolgiano, 
J. Cat. 1906. Cracker Jacks. 28. Johnson & Musser Caf. 1908. 
Wiltfong or Pride of Cahuenga. 29. Gumey Cat. 1909. Yankton 
Maincrop. 30. Breck Cat. 1913. Old Colony. 31. Sutton Caf. 
1922. Delicacy. 



STRATAGEM GROUP 



1. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 11:70. 1880. Stratagem, Carter's. 
2. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:273. 1901. Danby Stratagem. 3. 
Allan Cat. 1914. Dandy Stratagem. 4. Burpee Cat. 1896. Im- 
proved Stratagem. 5. Farquhar Cat. 1906. Cox's Improved 
Stratagem. 6. Garo". Chron. n. ser. 14:617. 1880. John Bull. 7. 
Ibid. n. ser. 20:644. 1883 Triumph. 8. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 7:138. 
1889. Sharp's Triumph. 9. Rural N. Y. 15:218. 1886. Pride 
of America. 10. Rural N. Y. 51 :215. 1892. Astonisher, Benham's. 
II. Sutton Caf. 1896. John Lee, Dwarf Defiance. 12. Rural 
N. Y. 55:547. 1896. New Life. 13. Carter Caf. 1898. Majes- 
tic, Carter's. 11. Rural N. Y. 61:514. 1902. Nott's Prolific. 15. 



Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:274. 1901. The Sherwood. 16. Rout- 
ledge Caf. 1918. King Edward (probably erroneous). 17. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 26:279. 1901. Magnum Bonum. 18. Rural 
N. Y. 61:253. 1902. Ambler's Magnum Bonum. 19. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. Jour. 27:204. 1903. Battleship, Carter's. 20. Maule Caf. 
1909. Potlatch. 21. Schultz Caf. 1913. Big Marvel. 22. Breck 
Cat. 1913. Improved Champion. 23. Livingston Caf. 1908. 
Livingston's First Choice. 21. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 37:418. 
1913. Rent Payer. 25. De Giorgi Cat . 1914. Model, De Giorgi's. 
26. Condon Caf. 1918. Ultimatum. 



CHAMPION OF ENGLAND GROUP 



1. Sinclair Caf. 1826. Knight's Tall Marrow. 2. Hort. Reg. 
3:242. 1834. Dwarf Green Marrow, Knight's Pea, Knight's Late, 
Knight's New, Knight's New Dwarf, Pois ride. 3. Lawson Agr. 
Man. 80. 1836. Knight's Dwarf White Wrinkled Marrow, Knight's t 
Tall White Wrinkled Marrow-, Knight's Dwarf Marrow, Knight's i 
Tall White Wrinkled Marrowfat, Knight's Improved White Wrinkled 
Marrowfat, Knight's Dwarf Green Wrinkled Marrowfat, Knight's 
Tall Green Marrowfat. I. Rogers Veg. Cult. 227, 230, 231. 1839. 
Knight's Green Dwarf Wrinkled. Knight's Dwarf Wrinkled Marrow- 



fat, Knight's Tall White Marrowfat, Knight's Tall Green Marrow. 
5. Gard. Chron. 84, 327, 329, 713. Knight's Dwarf Green Marrow, 
Knight's Tall Marrow, Knight's Dwarf Green Marrowfat. 6. 
Ibid. 882. 1842. Knight's Blue Dwarf Wrinkled Marrowfat. 7. 
Ibid. 68. 1850. Knight's Late, Ride ou de Knight, Ride tardis, 
Knight's Tall White Marrow, Knight's Tall Blue Marrow. 8. 
Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 541. 1863. Knight's Dwarf Blue Marrow. 
9. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:248. 1885. De Knight, De Knight Sucre, De 
Brezil. 10. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:269. 1885. As synonyms of Knight 



122 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Dwarf Green Marrow : Ride nain vert hatif , and probably erroneous, 
Hair's Dwarf Green Marrow, Hair's Dwarf Mammoth, Napoleon, 
Climax. 11. Gard. Chron. 801. 1846. Champion of England, 
Fairbeard's. 12. Hovey Car. 1849. Champion of England. 13. 
McCullough, J. Chas. Car. 1902. Improved Champion of Eng- 
land. 1 1. Gard. Chron. 18. 1850. Hair's Dwarf Mammoth, 
Knight's Marrow: and 3rd ser. 22:276. 1897. Hairs' Dwarf Mam- 
moth. 15. U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. 314. 1856. (As 10, thirdl. 16. 
Thompson Gard. Asst. 312. 1859. Hair's Dwarf Green Mammoth. 
17. Evans Car. 1868. Dwarf Green Mammoth. 18. Thorburn Car. 
1882. (As 10, second i. 19. Gard. Chron. 834. 1854. Waite's 
King of the Marrows. 20. Ibid. 1. 1857. Monarch, Tall Mam- 
moth. 21. Florist 301. 1860. Tall Green Wrinkled Mammoth. 



22. Gard Chron. 835. 1856. (As 19, last). 23. Florist 301. 
1860. Epps' Monarch, Competitor. 21. Gard. Chron. 734. 1867. 
Mote Marrow, Strathmore Hero. 25. Ibid. 1017. 1859. Tall 
Green Mammoth. 23a. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:109. 1873. 
Thorpe Perrowe Early Marrow. 26. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:245. 1885. 
King of the Marrows, Green Tall Square Mammoth, Ride grande 
vert Mammoth. 27. Gard. Chron. 802, 835. 1856. lAs 10, 
fourth, fifth). 28. Ibid. 1017. 1859. Fairhead's Excelsior. 29. 
Ibid. 72. 1864. Fairbeard's Forty Fold. 30. Ibid. 544. 1871. 
Popular. 31. Ibid. 803. 1875. Commander in Chief. 32. Rural 
N. Y. 62:486. 1903. Kelvedonian. 33. Moore & Simon Car. 
1907. Scotch Champion. 31. Kelway Car. 1922. Free Bearer. 



NE PLUS ULTRA GROUP 



1. Lawson Agr. Man. 81. 1834. Magnum Bonum. 2. Gard. 
Chron. 16. 1872. Cullingford's Magnum Bonum. 3. (omitted as 
erroneous). 1. Ibid. 781. 1845. Ne Plus Ultra. 3. Ibid. 1017. 1859. 
Jay's Conqueror, Payne's Conqueror. 6. Ibid. 118. 1861. Knight's 
Ne Plus Ultra. 6a. Ibid. 734. 1867. Knight's Albert Edward, 
Pearce's Gardener's Delight, Gen. Wyndham. 8. Vilmorin- 
Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 472. 1883. Cullingford's Champion, Champion 
of the Wirld. 9. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 12:37. 1890. Jeyes' 
Conqueror, Buckley's Gen. Wyndham. 10. Denaiffe L.P.P. 
187. 1906. Nee Plus Ultra. 11. In Sweden, Non Plus Ultra. 12. 
Gard. Chron. 45. 1859. I As 9, second). 13. Ibid. n. ser. 16:210. 

1881. (As 5, second). It. Ibid. 834. 1854. Lord Raglan. 13. 
Ibid. 487. 1857. Perfection Marrow. 16. Ibid. 70. 1858. Veitch's 
Perfection. 17. Ibid. 694. 1859. (As 3?), As 14?). 18. Ibid. 
172. 1866. Dickson's New Paragon. 19. Ibid. 660. 1868. Patter- 
son's Matchless. 20. Ibid. 734. 1867. Lord Palmerston? Laxton's 
Leader? 21. Ibid. 1007. 1612. 1872. Laxton's Omega, Omega. 
22. Ibid. 1692. 1872. G.F.Wilson. 23. Ibid. n. ser. 2:732. 1874. 
Connoisseur. 21. Ibid. 166. 1878. Little Wonder, Carter's. 
21a. Hogg Gard. Yr. Bk. 11:79. 1873. Dixon's Early Dwarf 
Paragon. 23. Ibid. n. ser. 18:581. 1882. Sharpe's Paragon. 

26. Rural N. Y. 11:496. 1885. Culverwell's Early Paragon. 

27. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. Paragon. 28. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 
37:416. 1911. Paragon, Veitch's. 29. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 18:807. 

1882. Sutton's Latest of All. 30. Ibid. 141. Walker's Perpetual. 
31. Ibid. n. ser. 20:471. 1883. Walker's Perpetual Bearer. 32. 



Ibid. n. ser. 22:341. Watkin's (erroneously) Perpetual. 33. 
Maule Car. 1894. New Perpetual. 31. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 
20:202. 1883. Magnificent, Eckford's. 33. Gard. Chron. n. ser. 
20:649. 1883. Sander's Marrow. 36. Ibid. 3rd ser. 2:70. 1887. 
Autocrat, Veitch's. 37. Ibid. n. ser. 28:824. 1886. Anticipation, 
Carter's. 38. Ibid. 3rd ser. 2:618. 1887. Yorkshire Gem. 39. 
N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:331. 1888. American Beauty. 10. Gard. Chron. 
3rd ser. 4:722. 1888. The Don, Quality. 11. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
Jour. 12:29. 1890. Matchless, Sutton's. 12. Gard. Chron. 3rd 
ser. 10:133. 1891. Chelsonian. 13. Ibid. 3rd ser. 6:743. 1889. 
Juno. 11. Ibid. 3rd ser. 13: 74. 1894. Goldfinder. 13. Buckbee 
Car. 1894. Grant's Favorite. 46. W. Va. Sta. Bui. 39:149. 1895. 
Gen. Grant. 17. Wood Car. 1895. Acme. 18. Sutton Car. 1895. 
Late Queen. 49. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 23:164. 1900. Capt. 
Cuttle. 30. Sutton Car. 1898. Continuity. 31. Gard. Chron. 
3rd ser. 24:99. 1898. Reliance, Hurst's. 32. Ibid. 3rd ser. 21:35. 
1898. Thomas Laxton; p. 99-Essential. 33. Sutton Car. 1899. 
Prince of Peas. 51. Ibid. Cat. 1902. Lord Roberts. 55. Eckford 
Car. 1906. Censor. 56. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 41:289. 1915. 
Snowdrop. 57. Morse Car. 1922. Early Snowdrop. 58. Sutton 
Car. 1907. King Edward. 59. Griffith & Turner Car. 1910. 
Maryland Pride. 60. Carter Car. 1913. Dreadnought. 61. 
Sutton Car. 1913. Longstander. 62. Routledge Car. 1918. Rout- 
ledge Prize. 63. Sutton Car. 1920. Alliance. 64. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. Jour. 48:88. 1923. Liberty. 



TELEPHONE GROUP 



1. Gard. Chron. 1544. 1871. Laxton's Superlative. 2. 
Ibid. 708. 1878. Telephone. 3. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:246. 1885. 
Carter's Telephone. 1. Dunning Car. 1908. Dark-podded Tele- 
phone. 5. Bolgiano. J. Car. 1911. Improved Telephone. 6. 
Diggs & Beadle Car. 1923. Improved Dark Green Telephone. 
7. Griswold Car. 1923. Allan's Improved Telephone or Admiral 
Dewey. 8. Wood, Stubbs Car. 1924. Improved Telephone Dark 
Pod. 9. Aggeler & Musser Car. 1913. Tall Telephone. 10. 
Gard. Chron. 644. 1878. Sharpe's Invincible. 11. Burpee Cat. 

1886. Invincible Blue Marrow. 12. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 30:6. 
1901. Culverwell's Invincible. 13. Ibid. n. ser. 17:141. 1882. 
Sutton's Invincible Marrowfat. 11. Ibid. n. ser. 17:438. 1882. 
Duke of Albany. 13. Rev. Hort. 56. 1888. Due d'Albany. 16. 
Dreer Cat. 1896. American Champion. 17. Denaiffe L.P.P. 
1906. Boston Hero. 18. Rural N. Y. 13:826. 1884. Queen. 19. 
Allan Car. 1907. as 7, second). 20. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 2:646. 

1887. Sharpe's Victory. 21. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 43:518. 1918. 
Victory. 22. Bolgiano, J. Car. 1920. New Victory. 23. Gard. 
Chron. 3rd ser. 1:204. 1887. Abbott's Duchess. 21. Ibid. 3rd 
ser. 2:618. 1887. (23) = (141. 23. Ibid. 3rd ser. 5:6. 1889. Duch- 
ess, The; Abbott. 26. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:331. 1888. (As 16.) 27. 
N.Y. Sta. Rpr. 7:135. 1889. Henderson's Midsummer. 28. Lohr- 
mann Car. 1915. Midsummer. 29. Gard. Chron. 3rdser. 10: 133. 
1891. Alderman. 30. Ibid. 3rd ser. 18:423. 1895. Laxton's Alder- 
man. 31. Vaughan Car. 1908. Boston Unrivalled. 32. Currie 
Car. 1910. iAsl9,as5'. 33. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 10:479. 1892. Duke 
of Edinburgh. 34. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 9:69. 1891. Colossus. 
35. Ibid. 3rd ser. 15:124. 1894. Taber's Duke of York. 36. Dreer 
Cat. 1897. DukeofYork. 37. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 12: 73. 1892 
Empress of India. 38. Sutton Car. 1892. Exhibition Marrowfat. 
39. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 13:157. 1893. Epicure. 40. Ibid. 
82. 1848. Goliah. 1 1. Mcintosh Bk. Gard. 2:56. 1855. Early 
Goliah (indexed Goliath . 12. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 15:124. 
1894. Goliath. 13. Sutton Car. 1893. Magnum Bonum Marrow- 
fat. 41. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 18:606. 1895. (As 3D. 15. 
Sutton Car. 1895. Peerless Marrowfat. 16. Moore Seed Co. Car. 



1913. British Peerless. 17. Sutton Car. 1896. Prizewinner. 48. 
Landreth Car. 1896. Phonograph. 49. Mills Car. 1899. Enor- 
mous. 50. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 28:1900. Monarch. 51. S. 
Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:7. 1905. Sharpe's Improved Monarch. 52. 
Sutton Car. 1899. Sutton's Perpetual. 53. Salzer Car. 1902. 
Rough Rider. 51. Sutton Car. 1900. Centenary Marrowfat. 55. 
Eckford Car. 1906. Centenary. 56. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 30:6. 
1901. Sharpe's Standard. 57. Sutton Cat. 1901. Masterpiece. 58. 
Maule Car. 1901. Prodigious. 59. Ibid. 1910. Prince Edward. 
60. Northrup Car. 1901. Teddy Roosevelt. 61. Ford Car. 1906. 
(60) = (14, 16). 62. State Car. 1922. Roosevelt. 63. U. S. Dept. 
Agr.,B. P. I. Bui. 21:290. 1903. Summer Queen. 61. Roy. Hort. 
Soc. Jour. 29:682. 1905. Exhibition. 65. Vaughan Car. 1908. 
Vaughan's Best Exhibition. 66. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 39:139. 
1906. Quite Content. 67. Beckert Car. 1922 (as 58, incorrectly . 
68. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 37:406. 1911. Premier. 69. Sutton 
Car. 1906. Sutton's Superlative. 70. Darling Car. 1908. Petoskey. 
71. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 51:206. 1912. Harvestman. 72. Moore 
Seed Co. Car. 1909. Home Garden. 73. Livingston Car. 1909. 
Golden King. 7 1. Schultz Car. 1910. Top Notcher. 75. Sutton 
Car. 1912. Up-to-Date. 76. Dobbie Car. 1912. The Bell. 77. 
Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 38:579. 1913. Clipper (wrinkled). 78. 
Haskell Car. 1913. Haskell's Dark Green Pod. 79. Carter Car. 
1913. Market Gardener. 80. Bolgiano, F. W. Car. 1913. Full 
Crop. 81. Simon Car. 1913. Yankee Prince. 82. Kelway Car. 
1915. Good Indeed. 83. Vaughan Car. 1915. Late Gradus. 81. 
Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 13:510. 1918. William Richardson. 85. 
Sutton Car. 1916. Lord Kitchener. 86. L. c. The V. C. 87. 
Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 43:517. 1918. Lord Leicester. 88. Jung 
Car. 1919. Jung's Aristocrat. 89. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 29:401. 
1901. Veitch's Aristocrat. 90. Tait Car. 1918. Longfellow. 91. 
Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 43:505. 1918. Plentiful. 92. Sutton Car. 
1919. Amateur's Pride. 93. Moore & Simon Car. 1907. Prize- 
taker. 91. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 46:388. 1921. Admiral 
Beatty. 95. Clibran Car. 1924. Maincrop. 96. Buist Cars. Im- 
perator. 97. Kelway Car. 1923. Peacemaker. 



SENATOR GROUP 



1. Gard. Chron. 1199. 1872. Doctor Hogg. 2. L. c. 
Unique. 2a. Jour. Hort. 18:402. 1872. and Gard. Chron. 199. 
1872. Supplanter. 3. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 1:186. 1886. Bennetts 
Seedling Market, Bennett's Market. 4. Gard. Chron. 26:407, 
677. 1886. Laxton's Charmer. 5. Vick Car. 1892. Charmer. 
6. Gard. Chron. 3rd ser. 18:96. 1895. St. Duthus. 7. Ibid. 



3rd ser. 4:722. 1888. Shropshire Hero. 8. L. c. Heroine. 9. 
Ibid. 3rd ser. 16:156. 1894. Webb's Senator. 10. Veitch, J. Cat. 
1913. Senator or Improved Chas. I. 11. Sutton Car. 1894. 
Eureka. 12. Ibid. 1900. Best of All. 13. Ann. Hort. 194. 1891. 
Stanley. 14. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 27:207. 1902. Gladstone. 
lta. Mich. Sta. Bui. 120:24. 1895. Sterling. 15. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 



REFERENCES. NAMES AND SYNONYMS 



123 



7:136. 1889. Maincrop. 16. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 18:clxxvii. 
1894. Veitch's Maincrop. IT. Ibid. 26:274. 1901. Glory of 
Devon. 18. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 26: 273. 1901. Carter's Deli- 
catesse. 19. Carter Caf. 1913. Giant Delicatesse, Evergreen. 20. 
Sutton Cat. 1912. Improved Petit Pois. 21. Rice Cat. 1915 (?). 
Rice's No. 13. 22. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 36:725. 1910. 
Rearguard. 23. Ibid. 37:417. 1911. President. 21. N. Z. Dept. 



Agr. /our. 2:377. 1911. Star of Australia. 23. Kelway Cat. 1912. 
James Kelway. 26. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 13:511, 515. 1918. 
Union Jack. 27. Salzer Car. 1918. Giant Exhibition. 28. Unwin 
Cat. 1925. Advance Guard, Unwin's. 29. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 
18:88. 1923. Freedom. 30. Sutton Caf. 1922. Phenomenon. 
31. Roy. Hort. Soc. Jour. 17:84. 1922. John Bull. 32. De 
Giogri Caf. 1924. Chieftain. 



EDIBLE POD, or SUGAR GROUP 



'"A 



1. Ruellius Nat. Stirp. 1536. Fresh pods and peas eaten. 

2. Gerarde Herb. 1045. 1597. Straight podded type sugar peas. 

3. Worlidge Syst. Hort. 197. 1683. Crooked-podded type sugar 
peas. 1. Parkinson Par. Ter. 522. 1629. Sugar, also Pease without 
skins. 5. Fuller, Stacy. Blackwell Caf. 1688. Sugar Pease. 6. 
LandrethCaf. 1824. Eat Pods. 7. Lawson Agr. Man. 82. 1836. 
Sugar, Eatable-pods, Skinless. 8. Gard. Chron. 68. 1850. Edible 
Pod, Sans Parchemin. 9. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les. PI. Pot. 459. 
1883. Mange-tout, Zucker-Erbsen, Peulen, Digusciotenero, Mangia- 
tullo. 10. Tait Cafs. Cabbage Peas. 11. fYorf. Reg. 3:244. 
1834. Dwarf Dutch Sugar, Nain Suisse, Dwarf Crooked Sugar. 
11a. Portland Caf. 1901. Swiss. 12. Lawson Agr. Man. 82. 1836. 
Common Dwarf Crooked Sugar. 13. Gard. Chron. 68. 1850. 
Dwarf Sugar de Grace, Nain hatif de Hollande, Nain de Hollande. 
Early May Sugar, Early Dutch, Early Sugar, Nain a la Moelle 
d'Espagne 1 1. Thompson Gard. Asst. 322. 1859. Dwarf Dutch. 
l.->. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 552, 553. 1863. Common Dwarf 
Sugar, Dwarf Crooked-podded Sugar, Early Dwarf Dutch Sugar, 
Early Dwarf de Grace. 16. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 465. 
Sans parchemin tres nain hatif a chassis. (Vilmorin-Robinson: 
Very Dwarf Dutch Frame Sugar), (Denaiffe, LP. P. 192. 1906. 
Extra Early Very Dwarf Edible-podded). 17. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
2:86. 1884. Dwarf White Sugar. 18. Denaiffe L. P. P. 194. 1906. 
Mangetout nain blanc hatif. 19. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:274. 1885. 
Dwarf Royal Edible Pod. 20. Gregory Cat. 1890. (As 16. last I. 
21. Landreth Caf. 1892. Dwarf White Blossom Sugar. 22. N. Y. 
Sta. Rpt. 3:275. 1885. Very Early Dwarf (Edible-podded), Edible 
Podded Dwarf, Dwarf Capucin. 23. Ibid. 5:248. 1887. Prince 
Bismarck. 21. Haage 8b Schmidt Caf. 1899. Fiirst Bismarck. 
2.1. Lawson Agr. Man. 83. 1836. Dutch Dwarf Sugar. 26. Gard. 
Chron. 68. 1850. Sans Parchemin a Demi-rames. 27. Vilmorin- 
Andrieux Les. PI. Pot. 464. 1883. Sans parchemin nain hatif breton. 
28. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:273. 1885. Extra Early Dwarf Brittan, 
(sugar). 29. Denaiffe LP. P. 195, 1906. Tortu nain, A la reine 
laPerle. 30. Mawe-Abercrombie Univ. Gard. Bot.: Pisum. 1778. 
Dwarf Sugar. 31. Gard. Chron. 68. 1850. Dwarf Edible Pod, 
Ledman's Dwarf, Gros nain Sucre, Nain Sucre. 32. U. S. Pat. Off. 
Rpt. \Agr.) 1865. Early English Crooked White Flowered. 33. 
Gard. Chron. 925, 1867. Common Dwarf Sugar. 31. Vilmorin- 
Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 469. 1883. Sans parchemin nain ordinaire, 
Mangetout sans rames, Capucin double. 35. Hort. Reg. 3:244. 
1834. (As 13, fourth I, Early May, (as 13, fourth, sixth, eighth). 
36. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:274. 1885. Dwarf White Edible Podded, (as 
17). 37. Simon-Louis Freres Cat. 1921. Extra Early Edible Podded, 
Six Weeks White Sugar. 38. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les. PI. Pot. 459. 
1883. Sans parchemin de quarante jours. 38. Denaiffe LP. P. 
202. 1906. Six Weeks White Sugar. 39. Benary Cat. 1921. Forty 
Days. 40. Rogers Cat. 1901. Dwarf Debarbieux. 41. Hort. 
Reg. 3:244. 1834. Tamarind Sugar, New Tamarind. 42. Gard. 
Mag. No. 77. 1836. Tamarind Pea, Late Dwarf Sugar. 43. Haage 
& Schmidt Caf. 1899. Sabel Zucker-Erbse. II. Thorburn Caf. 
1902. Tall White Scimetar (Sugar). 15. Burpee Cat. 1915. Giant 
Sugar Sword. 16. Dallwig Caf. 1922. Improved Giant Sword. 
47. Haage & Schmidt Caf. 1899. Heinrichs fruhe. 18. Gurney 
Caf. 1918. Henry's Early Prolific (Sugar). 19. Benary Caf. 
1921. Heinrich's Earliest. 50. Landreth Caf. 1824. Sugar. 51. 
Perry & Co. Cat. 1892. White Sugar. 52. N.Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:271. 
1885. Large White Edible Podded, Large White Podded Sugar. 

53. Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836. (As 9, first), New, (As 50), Broad- 
sword, Early Spanish. 51. Gard. Chron. 68. 1850. Large Crooked 
Sugar, Six-inch-pod Sugar, Sans parchemin blanc a grandes cosses, 
Comes Belier. 55. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 461. 1883. 
Corne de Belier, Gourmand blanc a large cosse, Saint-Quentin, 
Sans parchemin grand a fleur blanche, Geant de Beaulieu, Lyonnais 
a rames. Sans parchemin de Brauere, Crochu a large cosse. (As 

54, first i, Vilmorin-Robinson Veg. Gard. 529. 1920. Large Crooked, 
or Scimetar. 56. Denaiffe LP. P. 203. 1906. Tall Half-sugar. 
57. Lawson Agr. Man. 83. 1836. Late Wyker Sugar. 58. Gard. 
Chron. 68. 1850. Large White Flowering Edible Pod, Late White 
Sugar, 'as 57). 59. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 6:331. 1888. Saint Desirat 
Melting. 60. Burpee Caf. 1893. Mammoth Melting Sugar. 



61. Farmer Caf. 1914. Tall Melting Sugar. 62. Bolgiano, J. Caf . 
1923. Edible Podded Mammoth Melting Sugar, Melting Sugar. 
63. Ann. Hort. 124. 1889. (As 62, second). 63a. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
Jour. 52:114. 1927. Melting Marrow Edible Podded. 61. Hender- 
son Cat. 1919. Perfection Sugar. 65. U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. \Agr.) 
314. 1856. Tall Skinless, Sans parchemin a rames. 66. Russell 
Cat. 1827. Tall Crooked Sugar. 67. Hort. Reg. 3:245. 1834. 
Tall Sugar, (as 4, first; as 54, first; as 53, fourth), Sans parchemin 
blanc a grand cosse, Sans parchemin blanc tres long cosse, Late 
Tall Sugar. 68. Lawson Agr. Man. 83. 1836. Tall, or French 
Imperial (Sugar). 69. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:272. 1885. Tall Edible 
Podded. 70. DreerCaf. 1894. Tall White Sugar. 71. Thorburn 
Caf. 1898. Giant White (Sugar). 72. Haage & Schmidt Caf. 
1899. Moerheim's Weisse Riessen-Zucker. 73. Farmer Cat. 
1914. Tall Moerheim Giant White. 71. Landreth Caf. 1892. 
Tall White Blossom Sugar. 75. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 
469. 1883. Sans parchemin ride nain, I Vilmorin Robinson Veg. 
Gard. 541. 1920. Knight's Dwarf Marrow Sugar). 76. N. Y. 
Sta. Rpt. 2:86. 1884. Wrinkled Sugar. 77. Ibid. 3:271. 1885. 
Wrinkled Edible Podded, (as 51). 78. U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. I Agr.) 
314. 1856. Tall Wrinkled, Ride a rames. 79. Lawson Agr. Man. 
83. 1836. Vilmorins Sugar. 80. Amer. Hort. Ann. 136. 1867. 
Vilmorin's New Wrinkled Edible-podded. 81. Gard. Chron. 
68. 1850. White-podded Sugar, Sans parchemin a cosse blanc, 
Yellow Podded Sugar, Sans parchemin a cose jaune. 82. Mills 
Cat. 1898. Pride of the Garden Golden Sugar. 83. Vilmorin- 
Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 460. 1883. Beurre. 81 N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:273. 1885. Edible Podded Butter. 85. Gregory Caf. 1890. Tall 
Butter Sugar. 86. Benary Caf. 1900. White Thick Podded 
Butter. 87. Haage & Schmidt Cat. 1899. Dickschottige Butter- 
Zacker-Erbse (= Thick-podded Butter). 88. Roy. Hort. Soc. 
Jour. 48:90. 1923. Giant Butter. 89. Vilmorin-Andrieux, Les 
PI. Pot. 469. 1883. Sans parchemin nain gris. 90. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:86. 1885. Dwarf Gray Sugar. 91. Ann. Hort. 123. 1889. Dwarf 
Gray-Seeded Sugar. 92. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:274. 1885. Dwarf 
Gray Edible Podded. 93. Landreth Caf. 1892. Dwarf Purple 
Blossom Sugar. 91. Livingston Cat. 1901. Prolific Giant-podded 
Sugar. 95. Denaiffe LP. P. 194, 200. 1906. Mangetout nain 
violet a longues cosses, Sans parchemin nain a tres large cosse [a| 
fleurs violettes, Dwarf Gray-seeded Large-podded Sugar. 96. 
Thorburn Caf. 1892. French Dwarf Sugar. 97. Sutton Cat. 1897. 
French Sugar. 98. Gard. Mag. No. 77. 1836. Red-flowered Sugar. 
99. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 469. 1883. Sans parchemin a 
fleur rouge. 100. Burr Fid. Gard. Veg. 555. 1863. Chocolate. 

101. Vilmorin-Andrieux Les PI. Pot. 463. 1883. Geant sans parch- 
emin, Bisalto d'Espagne, D' Alger, Kapuziner, Riesen Kapuziner. 

102. Gard. Chron. 68. 1850. Giant Eatable Podded. 103. Burr 
Fid. Gard. Veg. 553. 1863. Giant Sugar. 104. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 
3:272. 1885. Giant Edible Podded. 10 la. Denaiffe LP. P. 212. 
1906. , Sans parchemin geant a tres larges cosses, Carouby, Carrou- 
bier, A la Dame, Giant Very Large-podded Sugar. 105. Haage 
& Schmidt Cat. 1899. Florentiner. 106. Vilmorin-Robinson, Veg. 
Gard. 548. 1906. Giant Florentine, Grosse Graue Florentiner 
Zucker. 107. Benary Cat. 1921. Giant Switzerland. 108. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. Jour. 48:90. 1923. Swiss Giant Sugar. 109. Landreth 
Cafs. 1907, 1913. Luscious, Tall Luscious. 110. Stumpp & Walter 
Cat. 1913. Luscious Melting Sugar. 11 1. Haage & Schmidt Cat. 
1899. Mammoth Zucker. I Ha. Sonderegger Cat. 1910. Mam- 
moth German Sugar. 112. Wood Caf. 1905. Mammoth Luscious 
Sugar. 113. S. Dak. Sta. Bui. 91:7. 1905. Mammoth-podded 
Sugar. 111. Mann Cat. 1921. Mammoth-pod Sugar. 115. Bur- 
nett Caf . 1922. Mammoth Gray-seeded Sugar. 116. Evans Cat. 
1904. Mammoth Field Sugar. 117. Lawson Agr. Man. 83. 1836. 
American Edible Pod Red or Purple. 118. Lawson Agr. Man. 
83. 1836. Common Tall Crooked Sugar. 119. Ferry Cat. 1882. 
Tall Sugar. 120. N. Y. Sta. Rpt. 3:272. 1884. Tall Gray Edible 
Podded, Tall Gray Sugar. 121. Landreth Caf. 1892. Tall Purple 
Blossom Sugar. 122. Maule Caf. 1921 (as 4, first). 123. Hast- 
ings Cat. 1921. Sugar, or Salad, Edible Podded. 121. Gard. 
Chron. 68. 1850. White Podded Sugar. 125. Amer. Gard. 

I Mag. 2:431. 1836. Fishamend's Sugar. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



The publications here listed have been consulted and are cited in references or in the text of the descriptions of pea varieties in 
this part of Vegetables of New York. It is assumed that abbreviations used in the references are sufficiently explicit to identify the 
publications meant: so they are not repeated, because of necessity for condensation, in the alphabetical lists given below. These are 
arranged in three sections: Books, periodicals, and names of pea breeders or seedsmen who are referred to in catalogs or elsewhere in con- 
nection with the history or description of the varieties or groups of varieties of peas. 



BOOKS 

Bridgeman, Thomas. Young Gardener's Assistant. New York: 
1857. 

Burr, Fearing. Field and Garden Vegetables. Boston: 1863. 

Citizen of Virginia — (See John Randolph) 

Denaiffe. Les Pois Potagers. Paris: 1906. 

Evelyn, John, translator of De la Quintinye. Compleat Gardiner. 
London: 1693. 

Hogg, Robert. Gardeners' Year Book, Almanack and Directory. 
London: 1859- (?) 

Lindley, George, edited by John Lindley. Guide to the Orchard, 
and Kitchen Garden. London: 1831. 

Lawson, Peter and Son. Agriculturist's Manual. Edinburgh: 
1836. 

Loudon, J. C. Encyclopedia of Gardening. London: [1834]. 

Low, David. Elements of Practical Agriculture. London: 1843. 

M'Intosh, Charles. Book of the Garden. London: 1855. 

McMahon, Bernard. American Gardeners' Calendar. Philadel- 
phia: 1806. 

Mawe, Thomas, and John Abercrombie. Universal Gardener 
and Botanist. London: 1778. 

Miller, Philip, revised by Thomas Martyn. Gardener's and Bota- 
nist's Dictionary: Pisum. London: 1807. 

Nicholson, George. Dictionaire d'Horticulture et de Jardinage. 
IV. Paris: 1897: translated: Illustrated Dictionary of Horticul- 
ture. London: 1900. 

Parkinson, John. Paradisus in Sole Paradisus Terrestris. London: 
1629. 

[Randolph, John] Citizen of Virginia. Treatise on Gardening. 
Printed about 1765; reprinted 1924. 

Robinson, W. Vegetable Garden. London: 1920. Translation 
of Vilmorin, Audrieux & Cie: Les Plantes Potageres. 

Rogers, John. The Vegetable Cultivator. London: 1839. 

Thompson, Robert. Gardener's Assistant. Glasgow, etc.: 1859. 

Vilmorin, Audrieux 8s Cie. Les Plantes Potageres. Paris: 1883. 
Revised edition translated by Robinson. 

Watson, Alexander. American Home Garden. New York: 1860. 

PERIODICALS 

American Agriculturist. New York: 1843- 

American Garden, later American Gardening. Brooklyn, etc.: 
1874-1891. 

American Gardening, formerly American Garden. New York: 
1892-1904. 

American Gardener's Magazine (vols. 1, 2); and Magazine of Horti- 
culture. Boston: 1835-1868. 

American Horticultural Annual. New York: 1867-1871. 

American Journal of Horticulture. Boston: 1867-69, continued as 
Tilton's Journal of Horticulture and Florist's Companion. Bos- 
ton: 1869-1871. 

Annals of Horticulture, by Bailey. New York: 1889-1893. 

Bon Jardinier. Paris: 1768-1912. 

Cottage Gardener. London: 1849-1861; continued as Journal of 
Horticulture, Cottage Gardener and Country Gentleman. 

Country Gentleman. Albany, etc.: 1853-1915. 

Cultivator. Albany: 1838-1865. 

Florist. London: 1848-1861; continued as Florist and Pomologist. 
London: 1863-1884. 

Gardeners' Chronicle. London : 1 84 1 - 

Gardeners' Monthly, and Horticultural Advertizer. Philadelphia: 
1859-1875; continued as Gardeners' Monthly and Horticulturist. 
Philadelphia: 1876-1888. 

Horticultural Register and General Magazine. London: 1832-1836. 

Horticultural Society of London, Transactions. London: 1807-1848. 

Journal of Horticulture, Cottage Gardener and Country Gentleman. 
London: 1861-1915; formerly Cottage Gardener. 

Magazine of Horticulture. See American Gardener's Magazine. 

Revue Horticole. Paris: 1847- 

Royal Horticultural Society, Journal. London: 1846-: formerly 
Journal of the Horticultural Society of London. 

Rural New Yorker. Rochester, etc., mainly New York: 1859- 

BREEDERS AND SEEDSMEN 
Abbott, David, Riverdale, near Doncaster, Eng. 
Adams, T. Lee, Kansas City, Mo. 

Aggeler & Musser formerly Johnson & Musser), Los Angeles, Calif. 
Alexander, O. H. breeder i, Charlotte, Vt. 



Alexander Seed Co., Augusta, Ga. 

Alneer Bros., Rockford, 111. 

Allan, John H., and Allan, J. H., Seed Co., Picton, Canada; Alpena, 

Mich., and Sheboygan, Wis. 
Allen, Sterling & Lothrop, Portland, Me. 

Anderson, of Hay, Anderson & Sangster, Newington Butts, Eng. 
Angell, C. E., & Co., Oshkosh, Wis. 
Arnold, Chas. I breeder I, Paris, Ontario, Canada. 
Baker's, Woolverhampton, Eng. 
Barnard, W. W., Chicago, 111. 
Barr 86 Sons., Covent Garden, London, Eng. 
Barr & Sugden, Covent Garden, W. C. London, Eng. 
Bass & Brown, Sudbury, Suffolk, Eng. 
Beckert Seed Store, Pittsburgh, Pa. 

Beckett, Edwin, Aldenham House Gardens, Elstree, Eng. 
Bell & Bieberstedt, Leith, Scotland. 
Benary, Ernst, Erfurt, Ger. 
Bennett, John, Whatcom, Wash. 
Berberry, — , Kenilworth, Eng. 
Bishop, David, New Scone, near Perth, Scotland. 
Bliss, B. K., & Co., New York, N. Y. 
Boddington, Arthur T., & Co., New York, N. Y. 
Bolgiano, F. W., Washington, D. C. 
Bolgiano, J., Baltimore, Md. 
Booth, Wm., Baltimore, Md. 
Breck, Joseph, c* Sons, Boston, Mass. 
Brownlees, Wm., Hemel-Hempstead, Eng. 
Brand. Jas., Vancouver, B. C, Canada. 
Bruce, John A., Hamilton, Canada. 
Buckbee, H. W., Rockford, 111. 
Buist, Robert, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Burbidge, F., Whitfield, near Dover, Eng. 
Burnett Bros., New York, N. Y. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Cadwell & Jones, Hartford, Conn. 
California Seed Co., San Francisco, Calif. 
Cannell, H., 85 Sons, Swanley, Eng. 
Carpenter, Edward, Brighton, Eng. 
Carter, Jas., 8d Co., London, Eng. 
Charlton, Arthur, 81, Sons, Tunbridge Wells, Eng. 
Charlwood, Geo., Covent Garden, London, Eng. 
Childs, John Lewis, Floral Park, N. Y. 
Cleveland, A. B., Cape Vincent, N. Y. 
Clibran, W. R., Hale, Altrincham, Eng. 
Condon Bros., Rockford, 111. 

Cooper, Taber 8& Co., Witham and London, Eng. 
Cormack 8& Oliver, New Cross, Covent Garden, London. Eng. 
Cormack, Henry D. See Cormack & Oliver), London, Eng. 
Cottrell, of Dawe, Cottrell &, Benham, London, Eng. 
Cullen, F. J.. Witham, Essex, Eng. 
Cullen, Messrs. T., Witham, Eng. 
Culverwell, Wm. 1 breeder), Thorpe-Perrowe, Eng. 
Currie Bros., Milwaukee, Wis. 

Cutbush, Wm., & Son, Finchley, and Highgate, W., London. Eng. 
Dancer, A., Fulham, S. W., London, Eng. 
Daniels Bros., Norwich, Eng. 
Darling 8& Beahan, and Darling, Lou S. I from about 1917 1, Petoskey , 

Mich. 
De Giorgi Bros., Council Bluffs, Iowa. 
Denyer. W., Gracechurch St., E. C, London, Eng. 
Dicks, Messrs., Manchester, Eng. 
(1) Dickson, Francis & Arthur, 8d Sons, Chester, Eng. 

2 1 Dickson, Alex., & Sons, Belfast, Ireland. 

3 I Dickson, Edmund P., 8s Son, Hull, Eng. 

Dickson, Brown & Tait, or Dickson 8& Robinson. Manchester, Eng. 

Diggs & Beadle, Richmond, Va. 

Dillistone, Wm., Sible Hedingham. Essex, Eng. 

Dobbie & Co., Edinburgh, Scot. 

Douglas, John, Washington, D. C. 

Dreer, Henry A., Philadelphia, Pa. 

Dunning 8d Co., R. B.. Bangor, Me. 

Ebbert Seed Co.. Rocky Ford, Colo. 

Eckford, Henry, Wem, Eng. 

Elgin Seed Co.. Elgin, 111. 

Elliott. Wm.. 80 Sons. New York. N. Y. 

Elliott Nursery Co., Pittsburg, Pa. 

El Paso Seed Co., El Paso, Tex. 

Epps, W. P., Maidstone, Eng., and Epps & Co., Ringwood. Eng. 



124 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



125 



Evans. Edw. J., York, Pa. 

Evans Seed Co.. E. E., West Branch. Mich. 

Everitt. J. A.. Indianapolis. Ind. 

Fairbairn. E. F., Carlisle. Cumberland. Eng. 

Fairbeard. J. F., Sittingbourne, Kent. Eng. 

Fairbeard, Wm. F.. Sittingbourne. Kent, Eng. 

Fairhead, Jas.. & Son. Hull, Eng. 

Farmer Seed & Nursery Co., Faribault. Minn. 

Fames. Chas., London, Eng. 

Farquhar. R. & J., Boston, Mass. 

Ferre, Batcheller 8& Co.. Wethersfield, Conn. 

Ferry. D. M., Detroit. Mich. 

Field, Henry, Shenandoah, Iowa. 

Flanagan & Son, London, Eng. 

Forbes Seed Co.. formerly J. F. Noll, Newark, N. J. 

Ford, Frank, and Ford Seed Co., Ravenna, O. 

Fuller, Edward; Tracy, Theophilus; and Blackwell, Charles; Seeds- 
men at different London addresses, who issued a joint catalog 
in 1688. This was reprinted, in part, in Gardeners' Chronicle, 
24 (3rd ser.1 107. 1898. 

Galloway Bros., Waterloo, Iowa. 

Girling, Samuel, Stowmarket, Eng. 

Goff. Prof. Emmett S., Geneva, N. Y. 

Grand Junction Seed Co., Grand Junction, Colo. 

Gregory, J. J. H., Marblehead, Mass. 

Grenell, W. H., Cape Vincent, N. Y., or Pierrepont Manor, N. Y. 

Grey. Thos. J.. Boston, Mass. 

Griffith & Turner, Baltimore, Md. 

Grimstone, Wm.. Bloomsbury, W. C, Highgate, London, Eng. 

Griswold, Thos.. & Co., South Wethersfield, Conn. 

Griswold Seed & Nursery Co., Lincoln, Nebr. 

Groom, H., Walworth, or Clapham Rise, near London, Eng. 

Gumey Seed Co.. Yankton, S. Dak. 

Hairs, Duncan. Charing Cross, London, Eng. 

Haage & Schmidt, Erfurt, Ger. 

Hallowell Seed Co., San Francisco, Calif. 

Harnden Seed Co.. Kansas City, Mo. 

Harris, Joseph, Coldwater, N. Y. 

Harrison, i ), Romney, Eng. 

Harrison, T.. & Sons, Leicester, Eng. 

Haskell Implement & Seed Co., Lewiston, Me. 

Hastings, H. G.. & Co., Atlanta, Ga. 

Hawley, R. D.. East Hartford. Conn. 

Hay, Anderson & Sangster, Newington Butts, Eng. 

Hay. Sangster & Co., London. Eng. 

Henderson, Peter, New York, N. Y. 

Hill, Messrs., West Cambridge, near Boston, Mass. 

Hobday, G., Romford, Eng. 

Hobbies, Ltd., Dereham, Eng. 

Holmes, W. G., Tain, Scot. 

Horsford, F. H. breeder >, Charlotte, Vt. 

Hoskins, Dr. T. H. [breeder), Newport, Vt. 

Hovey, C. M., and Hovey & Co.. Boston, Mass. 

Hurst & Son, Chelsea and London, Eng. 

Isbell, S. M., & Co., Jackson, Mich. 

Jackson. Wm., & Co., Bedale, Yorkshire, Eng. 

John, W. O., & Son., Boston, Eng. 

Johnson 8s Musser i later Aggeler & Musserl, Los Angeles, Calif. 

Johnson & Stokes later Walter P. Stokes, Stokes Seed Farms Co., 
and Francis C. Stokes i, Philadelphia, Pa. 

Johnson Seed Co., and Johnson & Stokes, Philadelphia, Pa. 

Johnson, W. W., & Sons, Boston, Eng. 

Jung, J. W., Randolph, Wis. 

Keeney, N. B., & Son, Leroy, N. Y. 

Kelway & Son, Langport, Eng. 

Kent & Brydon, Darlington, Eng. 

Knight, Thos. Andrew i breeder I, Downton Castle, Wiltshire, Eng. 

Knight, Wm., Battle, Eng. 

Landreth = David Landreth ( 1784-1 789 i; David 8c Cuthbert Land- 
reth (1790-1829); David Landreth 8s Co. (1830-1842); David 
Landreth and D. Landreth Munns 1843-1844 ; David Landreth 
(1845-1859:; David Landreth & Son (1860-1874); David Land- 
reth & Sons 1 1875-1902i; D. Landreth Seed Co. (1903-) 

Lawson, Peter, & Son, Edinburgh, Scotland; and Westminster, Eng. 

Laxton, Thos. (breeder and seedsman) and Laxton Bros., Bedford, 
Eng. 

Leonard Seed Co., Chicago, 111. 

Lilly, Chas. H., and Lilly-Bogardus Seed Co., Seattle, Wash. 

Lincoln, T. H., & Co., Boston, Eng. 

Livingston Seed Co., Columbus, O. 

Lohrmann Seed Co., Detroit, Mich. 

McCullough, J. Chas., Cincinnati, O. 

McCullough's, J. M., Sons Co., Cincinnati, O. 



McKenzie Co., A. E., Brandon, Man., Can. 

McLean, Dr. (breederl, Colchester, Eng. 

McMillan, H., Kingston-on-Thames, Eng. 

Marlow Seed Co., Atchison, Kans. 

Maule, Wm. Henry, Philadelphia, Pa. 

May, L. L., & Co., St. Paul, Minn. 

Meyer, Stisser Co., Baltimore, Md. 

Michell. Henry F., Philadelphia, Pa. 

Michigan Seed Co., Bay City, Mich. 

Mills, F. B., Rose Hill. N. Y. 

Moore & Simon, Philadelphia, Pa. 

Moore Seed Co., Philadelphia, Pa. 

Morse C. C, & Co., San Francisco, Calif. 

Muzzy Bros., Paterson, N. J. 

Navlet, Chas. A., San Jose, Calif. 

Nebraska Seed Co., Omaha, Nebr. 

Noll, J. F., later Forbes Seed Co.. Newark, N. J. 

Northrup, Braslan, Goodwin Co., later Northrup, King 8;, Co., 

Minneapolis, Minn. 
Nott, Richard (breeder), Burlington, Vt. 
Nutting & Co., London, Eng. 
Paul, A.. 8s Son, Cheshunt, Eng. 
Pino, Willis S., Providence, R. I. 
Plant Seed Co., St. Louis, Mo. 
Pope, Rev. Mr. (breeder), Somerville, Mass. 
Porter, Walton Co., Salt Lake City, Utah 
Portland Seed Co., Portland, Ore. 
Poynter, Robert H., Taunton, Eng. 
Price 8c Read, later Geo. H. Price, Albany, N. Y. 
Randall-McLoughlin, Seattle, Wash. 
Rawson, W. W., Boston, Mass.; later Fottler, Fiske, Rawson Co.; 

and Fiske Seed Co. 
Rennie, Wm., Co., Toronto, Ontario, Can. 
Rice, Jerome B., Seed Co., Cambridge, N. Y. 
Reuter, C, New Orleans, La. 
Rogers Bros. Seed Co., Cape Vincent, N. Y., Sheboygan, Wis., and 

Chicago, 111. 
Roultedge Seed Co., Portland, Oreg. 
Russell, John B., Boston, Mass. 
Salzer, John A., Seed Co., La Crosse, Wis. 
Sander, F., & Co., St. Albans, Eng. 
Schell, Walter S., Harrisburg, Pa. 

Schultz, G. Edward, and Schultz Seed Store, Washington, D. C. 
Shumway. R. H., Rockford, 111. 
Simon 8o Son, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Simon-Louis Freres, Bruyeres-le-Chatel, France. 
Sinclair, R., Jr., & Co., and Sinclair & Moore, Baltimore, Md. 
Sonderegger Nursery & Seed House, Beatrice, Neb. 
Squier, Jas. M., & Son, Wellington, later Lindsay, Canada. 
Stark Bros., Louisiana, Mo. 
State Nursery 8& Seed Co., Helena, Mont. 

Steckler, J., & Co., formerly Richard Frotscher, New Orleans, La. 
Stuart & Mein, London, Eng., and Kelso, Scot. 
Sutton & Sons, Reading, Eng. 

Switzer, Stephen, Westminster, Eng.. Cat. 1731 quoted in Gar- 
dener's Chronicle, 24 (3rd serl 89. 1898. 
Sydenham, Robert, Birmingham, Eng. 
Taber, Geo., with Taber and Cullen, or Cooper, Taber 8d Co., 

Rivenhall, Witham, Eng. 
Tait, Geo., & Sons, Norfolk, Va. 

Thorburn, G., and Thorburn, J. M., New York, N. Y. 
Tinsley Seed Co., St. Louis, Mo. 
Thurston, G. & J., Stowmarket, Eng. 
Turner, Chas., Slough, Eng. 
Unwin, W. J., Histon, Eng. 
Vaughan, J. C, Chicago, 111. Vaughan Seed Store, Chicago, 111., 

and New York, N. Y. 
Veitch, Jas., & Son, Chelsea, Eng. 
Veitch, Robt., & Son, Exeter, Eng. 
Vick, Jas., & Sons, Rochester, N. Y. 
Waite, J. G., High Holborn, London, Eng. 
Ward, S., & Co., Bath, Eng. 
Warner 8c Warner, later Warner, Seaman 6* Warner, Cornhill, 

London, Eng. 
Watkins & Simpson, Drury Lane, Covent Garden, London, Eng. 
Webb 85 Son, Wordsley, Eng. 
Weeber & Son, New York, N. Y. 
Western Seed Co., Denver, Colo. 
Whale, W., Egham, Surrey, Eng. 
Williams Seed Co., Norfolk, Va. 
Wood, Stubbs & Co., Lexington, Ky. 
Wood, T. W., & Sons, Richmond, Va. 
Yates, Samuel, Manchester, Eng. 



INDEX 



varieties, 66; minor 



major varieties, 39; 



Acacia, variant type, 14 

Advancer group, characteristics, 66; major 

varieties, 104 
Alaska group, characteristics, 38; history, 38 

minor varieties, 89 
Allan. John H., pea breeder, 9 
America, peas in, 8 
American pea breeders, 9 
American varieties of peas. 9 

Arachis hypogaea, common names. 10; relation to pea, 10 
Arnold, Charles, pea breeder, 9 
Ax-vetch, habitat and uses, 13; relation to pea, 12; synonyms, 



12 



Garden pea, systematic notes, 18 

Gem peas, characteristics, 57; major varieties, 57; minor varieties, 98 

Gerarde. classification of peas by, 6 

Goss, John, work with peas, 8 

Greeks, pea known to, 3 

H 

History of Extra Early group of peas, 22 
History of garden pea, 3 
Horsford, F. H., pea breeder, 9 
Hurst & Co., work in pea breeding, 8 



11; relation to pea, 11; syno- 



69: major varieties, 
10 



Botany of peas, 10 

Broad bean, description, 1 1 : history, 

nyms, 11 
Brotherton, Wilbur, pea breeder, 9 
Buist, Robert, pea breeder, 9 
Burpee, W. Atlee, pea breeder, 9 



Carter 8b Co., work in pea breeding, 8 
Champion of England group, characteristics 

69; minor varieties, 106 
Chick pea. relation to garden pea, 10: synonyms 
China, occurrence of peas in, 5 
Cicer arietinum, races and varieties. 10, 11 
Cicer, history and description, 11; relation to pea, 10 
Cleveland, A. B., pea breeder, 9 
Columella, pea known to, 5 
Culverwell, William, work with peas, 8 



Descriptions of varieties (see Varieties described; names arranged 

alphabetically 
De Candolle, notes on history of peas, 4 
Delwiche, E. J., pea breeder, 9 
Dimpled-seeded group, characteristics, 43; major varieties, 44; minor 

varieties, 91 



Eckford, Henry, work with peas, 8 

Edible-podded group, characteristics, 78; classified varieties, 79 
Egypt, uncertain habitat of pea, 4 
England, history of peas in, 6 
Evelyn, John, classification of peas by, 6 

Extra Early group, characteristics, 22; description of varieties, 22; 
history, 22; major varieties, 21; minor varieties, 83 



Ferry, D. M., pea breeder, 9 

Field pea, systematic notes on, 17 

Field peas, varieties listed and grouped, 82, 83: Agnes, Albany, 
Amraoti, Andes, Archer, Arthur, Austrian Winter, Ball, Ban- 
galia, Black English, Black-eyed Marrowfat, Black Eyes, Nos. 
1 and 2, Bluebell, Blue Canadian. Blue Imperial, Blue Prussian, 
Brown Abyssinian, Brunswick Green, Canada, Canada Field, 
Canada Yellow Field, Canadian Beauty, Carlton, Cavalier, 
Chang, Clamart, Colorado, Colorado Field, Common Blue, 
Common Gray, Cossack, Delano, Dominion, Dwarf Blue 
Imperial, Dwarf Blue Prussian. Dwarf Green Albany, Early 
Blue, Early Britain, Early Crown, Early Heavy Cropper. 
Early Nimble Hog Pea, English Brown, Farnham, Fraile, 
French, French Gray, French June, Golden Marrow, Golden 
Drop, Golden Vine, Gray Hastings, Gray Rouncival, Gray 
Warwick, Gray Winter, Green, Green Canada, Green Scotch- 
man, Gregory, Hubert, Husbands, June, Kaiser, Kovaleff, 
Killamey, Kobilya, Large Gray, Late Gray, McAdoo, Maple, 
Maple Partridge Brittany, Meyer, Multiplier, Mummy, Negro, 
Nelson, Nero, Openshaw, Paragon, Pearl, Partridge, Pelushchka, 
Prince, Puslike, Russian Blue, Scotch, Scotch Beauty, Scotch 
Blue, Scotch Gray, Small French, Smiley, Solo, Speckled, 
Suffolk, Supenau, Tall Capucine, Tall Gray, Valencias, Victoria, 
Vida, Wellwood, White Canada, White Colorado, White 
Hundredfold, Winter, World Prize 

Flower of pea, description, 15 



India, uncertain habitat of pea, 4 

K 

Keeney, N. B., pea breeder, 9 

Knight, Thomas Andrew, work in crossing peas, 7, 8 



Landreth, David, pea breeder, 9 

Large Podded Dwarf group, characteristics, 60; major varieties, 61; 

minor varieties, 100 
Lathy rus, minor species of, 13; relation to pea, 12 
Lathyrus sativus, synonyms, 12 
Laxton. Thomas, work with peas, 8 

Lens esculenta, synonyms of, 12; varieties of, 12; relation to pea, 12 
Lentil, history of, 12; relation to pea, 12 
Lotus edulis, relation to pea. 10 
Lotus tetragonolobus. relation to pea, 10 

M 

McLean, Dr., work with peas, 8 

Marrowfat group, characteristics of, 34: history of, 35; major 
varieties of, 35; minor varieties of, 87 

N 

Names of varieties (see Varieties described I 

Ne Plus Ultra group, characteristics, 70; major varieties, 70; minor 

varieties, 107 
Nott, Richard, pea breeder, 9 

o 

Origin of Pisum sativum. 4 



Parkinson, classification of peas by, 7 

Pea, American varieties of, 9; chick, 10; development of fruit, 16; 
flowers of, 15; germination of, 14; perennial, physiological and 
anatomical differences from annual peas, 14; plant, physiology 
and anatomy of, 14; tendrilless, see Acacia, 14; varieties, 
advance in number, 9; varieties, descriptive terms used, 19; 
varieties, groups of, 20 

Peanut, relation to pea, 10: synonyms of, 10 

Peas, allies, botany of, 10: American breeders and improvers, 9; 
black-eyed, history of, 7; botany of, 10; classification as tall 
and dwarf, 7; description of major varieties, 22; description of 
minor varieties, 83; description of varieties, 19; dimpled, 
development of, 7; early names of, 5; edible podded, general 
characters, 3; Extra Early group, description of varieties, 22; 
edible podded, early use of, 6; field, general characters, 3: field, 
systematic notes on, 17; garden, general characters, 3; garden, 
history of, 3; garden, systematic notes on, 18; green, early use 
of, 6; in America, 8; in Stone Age, 4; overlapping of characters, 
4; shelling, general characters, 3; varietal descriptions, general 
notes, 19; wrinkled, history of, 7; wrinkled, varieties originated 
by Knight, 7 

Pickering, notes on history of peas, 4 

Pisum formosum, comparison with Pisum sativum, 14 

Pisum sativum, botanical description of, 16; comparison with P. 
formosum, 14; minor varieties of, 14; place of origin, 4; rela- 
tion to cultivated peas, 13; subsp. arvense, systematic notes 
on, 17: subsp. arvense, varieties of, 17; subsp. hortense, 
systematic notes on, 18; subsp. hortense, varieties of, 18; 
sub-species of, 13, 16. 

Pisum, systematic botany of, 13 

Pliny, pea known to, 5 



127 



128 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Rogers Bros., pea breeders, 9 

Romans, pea known to, 3 

Ruellius, separation of field and garden peas, 3 



Scimitar group, characteristics, 42; major varieties, 42: minor 
varieties, 91 

Scorpiurus vermiculata, relation to pea, 10 

Senator group, characteristics, 76; major varieties, 76; minor varie- 
ties, 113 

Starr, George, pea improver, 9 

Stone Age, peas known in, 4 

Stratagem group, characteristics, 67; major varieties, 67; minor 
varieties, 106 

Sugar peas < see Edible-podded) 

Sutton & Sons, work in pea breeding, 8 

Synonyms of broad bean, 11; peanut, 10 

Synonyms of names of varieties : 

N B From this list, to economize space, synonyms are omitted 
which include name of variety changed in spelling, or with 
seedsmen's names prefixed, or when preceded by such modify- 
ing adjectives as Early, Dwarf, etc. Such synonyms can 
be readily found from references following the variety name, 
in text. 

A la Reine, of Blue Imperial and of Early Emperor; Abbott, of 
Duchess; Alameda Sugar or Sweets, of Yorkshire Hero: Ameri- 
can Crown, of Rose or Crown; American Dwarf, of Dwarf 
Marrowfat; Andersonian Mummy, of Grimstone Egyptian; 
Arnold No. 2, of Bliss Everbearing; Auvergne Green, of Laxton 
Supreme: Baran or Baron and Bates Early Dwarf Nimble, of 
Early Frame; Bean, of Egg; Beck"s Eclipse, of Blue Scimetar: 
Beck's Gem and Beck's Marrow, of Tom Thumb; Bellamy 
Green Marrow, of Prizetaker; Bergere, of Early Emperor; 
Berkshire Hero, of Tall Green Marrow; Best Early, of Early 
Frame; Big Gem, of Yorkshire Hero; Black-eyed Susan, of 
Egg and of Lynn Wrinkled Marrow : Black Spotted, of Spanish 
Mullato; Bleu, of Blue Prussian; Bleu a courte tige, of Blue 
Imperial: Blue Alaska, of Alaska: Blue Dwarf and Blue Fan, 
of Groom Superb; Blue Marrow, of Blue Imperial; Blue Peter, 
of Tom Thumb, incorrectly; Blue Sabre, of Blue Scimetar; 
Blue Scymetar, of Blue Imperial; Blue Spanish Dwarf, of Groom 
Superb; Blue Tom Thumb, of Blue Peter; Blue Union, of Biue 
Prussian; Branching Victoria, of Branching Marrow; Bresilien, 
of Prince Albert; Brussels Early Blossom, of Charlton; Buchs- 
baum, of Tom Thumb; Burlington, of Philadelphia Extra 
Early; Bush Pea, of Tom Thumb; Cabbage Peas, of Edible 
Podded; Carpenter's Express, Carter's Earliest, and Carter's 
Lightning, of Sangster No. 1; Carter's Victoria, of British 
Queen; Cattell's Kent Rival, of Princess Royal; Cattell's 
Wonder, of British Queen; Chaud, of Prince Albert: Charlton 
Hotspur, of Hotspur; Clarke's Rapid Prolific, of Dillistone 
Early; Clarke's Ringwood, of Tom Thumb; Clematow carre 
feve, of Black Eyed Marrowfat; Cleveland's First and Best, 
of Sangster No. 1; Cluster, of Rose or Crown: Clutton's Early, 
of Prince Albert: Common Hotspur and Common White 
Boiling, of Charlton; Conqueror, of Early Emperor; Cook's 
Favorite, of Carter Hundredfold; Cosaque, of Auvergne; 
Cottrell's Wonder, of Dickson Favorite; Counsellor, of Coun 
cillor; Crochu, of Auvergne: Cromwell's May, of True May: 
d'Avent, of Prince Albert; Dandy, of Sangster No. 1; Dandy 
Stratagem, of Danby Stratagem; Danecroft Rival, of Emerald 
Gem, incorrectly; Daniel, of Daniel O'Rourke; Daniel O'Rourke. 
of Early Frame and of Sangster No. 1 : Davis Perfection, of 
Canners' Perfection; De Grace, of Tom Thumb; De Marly, of 
Tall Marrowfat: De Paris, of Early Frame: De Prusse, of 
Victoria; De Regneville, of Dillistone Early; De Rouelle, of 
Hotspur; De Sainte-Catherine, of Early Frame and of Early 
Washington: Delicatesse, of Auvergne; Dexter, of Philadelphia 
Extra Early; Dickson's Climax and Dickson's First and Best 
Early, of Sangster No. 1 : Dickson First and Best, of Caractacus 
and of Dillistone Early: Dickson's New Paragon, of Veitch 
Perfection; Dilliston's Early Prolific, of Railway; Doigt de 
Dame, of Lady Finger; Domine, of Hotspur, Double Blos- 
somed Frame, syn. of Early Frame: Dunnett's First Early, of 
Sangster No. 1; Dwarf Albany, of Early Frame: Dwarf Bog 
and Dwarf Crooked Sugar, of Spanish Dwarf: Dwarf Green 
Imperial and Dwarf Imperial, of Blue Imperial: Dwarf Prolific, 
of Dwarf Marrowfat; Dwarf Sabre, of Blue Imperial and of 
Blue Scimetar: Dwarf Telephone, of Daisy, incorrectly; Dwarf 
Tewsley, of Dwarf Marrowfat: Dwarf White Prolific and 
Dwarf White Prussian, of Dwarf Marrowfat; Earliest Double 
Blossom, of Charlton; Earliest of All, of Ferry' First and Best, 
erroneously: Eat Pods, of Edible Podded; Early Bedalean, of 
Early Emperor and of Cedo Nulli; Early Burlington, of Lan- 
dreth Extra Early; Early Caractacus, of Sangster No. 1 : Early 
Charlton, of Hotspur; Early Dillistone, of Dillistone Early; 



Early Dutch Green, of Blue Prussian: Early Dwarf, of Early 
Frame and of Prince Arthur: Early Emperor, of Early Frame; 
Early Eugene, of Eugenie; Early France Sugar, of Spanish 
Dwarf: Early French, of Early Frame; Early Green Marrow, of 
Bellamy Green Marrow; Early Grey Warwick, of Early War- 
wick; Early Grotto, of Shilling Grotto; Early Hartford, of 
East Hartford Extra Early; Early Hill, of Hill Extra Early; 
Early Kent, of Early Frame; Early May, Early Nicholas, Early 
Nimble and Early One-eyed, of Early Frame; Early Racehorse, 
of Early Washington; Early Rhenish Marrow, of Dwarf Marrow- 
fat : Early Racehorse, of Early Frame ; Early Railway, of Cedo 
Nulli and of Early Emperor; Early Scone, of Early Frame; 
Early Sebastopol, of Early Emperor; Early Single Frame, of 
Charlton: Early Sugar Frame, of Hotspur; Early Tana and 
Early Warwick, of Early Frame and of Racehorse; Early 
Washington, Early Waterloo, and Early Wilson, of Early 
Frame; East Kentish Invicta, of Kentish Invicta; Eastern 
Shore, of Charlton; Eclair, of Lightning; Emeraude, of Emerald 
Gem; Emir, of Ameer; Emperor of the Marrows, of British 
Queen; English Cedo Nulli, of Cedo Nulli; Erin's Queen, of 
British Queen; Essex and Essex Reading, of Hotspur; Essex 
Champion, of Early Frame and of Racehorse; Eventail, of 
Spanish Dwarf; Extra Early, of Prince Albert; Extra Early 
Dwarf Breton, of Dwarf Brittany; Extra Early Kent, of Dillis- 
ton Early; Extra Early Market, of Philadelphia Extra Early; 
Fairbeard's Conqueror, of Railway; Fairbeard's Early Surprise, 
of Charlton; Fairbeard's Hardy Early, of Carpenter Express 
and of Sangster No. 1: Fan, of Spanish Dwarf; Fames' Earliest 
May, of Early May; Faucille, of Auvergne: Fine Early, of Early 
Frame; Fine Long Podded Dwarf, of Blue Prussian: First and 
Best, of Philadelphia Extra Early; First and Best Early, of 
Dickson First and Best; First of All, of Daniel O'Rourke; 
Flack's Imperial, of Carter Surprise; Flack's Victoria or Victory, 
of Flack Imperial; Flanagan's Early, of Tom Thumb: Floren- 
tiner Pfluckerbse, of Early Frame; Florida McNeil, of McNeil; 
French Canner, of Auvergne: Funnel's Black Spotted, of Egg; 
Garbutt's Amazon, of Tall Green Marrow; General Grant, of 
Grant Favorite; General Windham, of British Queen: Giant 
Marrow and Gibb's Defiance, of Victoria; Glory of England, of 
Dwarf Marrowfat; Golden Charton, of Hotspur: Grand Impe- 
rial, of Blue Imperial; Green Auvergne, of Laxton Supreme; 
Green Hastings and Green Nonpareil, of Alaska types I?); 
Green Prolific, of Prizetaker; Green Prussian, of Blue Prussian; 
Green Wrinkled Marrow, of Early Green Marrow; Green's 
Superb Tall Marrow, of British Queen; Gregory's Surprise, 
of Surprise: Grotto, of Prizetaker; Guinea Dwarf, of Bishop 
Longpod: Hair's Defiance, of British Queen; Hancock, of 
Philadelphia Extra Early; Hasting, of Marrowfat; Hastings, of 
Hotspur; Hatif a la moelle d'Angleterre, of Dwarf Marrowfat; 
Hatif de Plainpalais, of Prince Albert ; Hatif uniflore de Gend- 
brugge, of Dillistone Early; Henderson's First of All, of Phila- 
delphia Extra Early and of Sangster No. 1 : Hooper's Early, or 
New. Rival, of Sangster No. 1 : Hooper's Incomparable, of 
British Queen; Hots, of Hotspur; Imperial Green Marrow, of 
Tall Green Marrow; Imperial Wonder, of British Queen; 
Improved Charles First, of Senator: Improved Early Champion, 
of Caractacus and of Sangster No. 1 ; Improved Stratagem, of 
Giant Podded; Isherwood's Railway, of Sangster No. 1; Joseph, 
of Emerald Gem; Kent's Early, of Early Kent; L'Eveque, 
also, misspelled, L'Evergne, of Bishop Dwarf; Late Dwarf, of 
Charlton; Late Spanish Dwarf, of Dwarf Brittany; Laurant 
or Laurent, of Early Frame: Le Rapide, of Rapid; Leicester 
Defiance, of Prizetaker; Lion, of British Lion; Long Island 
Mammoth, of Telegraph; Lord Palmerston, of Veitch Perfec- 
tion; Mange-tout, of Edible Podded; Maincrop, of Telegraph; 
Marquis of Hastings, of Hotspur: Mason's Double Blossomed, 
of Early Frame: Merveille d'Etampes, of Etampes Wonder: 
Michaux and Michaux Ordinaire, of Hotspur; Michaux a la 
Rouelle and Michaux precoce, of Charlton; Mikado, of Green 
Gem; Morning Star, of Early Emperor and of Maud S; Moun- 
tain Telephone, of Telephone; Mummy, of Rose or Crown; 
Nain Bishop a Longues Cosses, of Bishop Longpod: Nain des 
Keroulas, of Dwarf Brittany, Nain Gontier, Nain Tres Hatif a 
Chassis and Nain Hatif Extra, of Tom Thumb; Nain Tres 
Hatif d'Annonay, of Annonay; Nain vert Bleu and Nain vert 
Imperial, of Blue Prussian: New Dwarf Norman, of Dwarf 
Marrowfat: New Dwarf Pea, of Branching Marrow: New 
Tewsly, of Dwarf Marrowfat: Nimble Taylor, of Hotspur; 
Nonesuch, of Black Eyed Marrowfat; Nonpareil, of Blue 
Prussian; Nonsuch, of Woodford Marrow; Nuttings No. 1, of 
White Gem: Ohio Chief, of Saxonia; Ormond, of Hotspur: 
Oxonian, of Exonian; Paddington, of Hotspur; Paquette, of 
Rose or Crown; Patagonian, of Egg: Patterson's Matchless, of 
Veitch Perfection; Paul's Early Dwarf and Paul's Prolific, of 
Branching Marrow: Pearl, of Nonsuch; Perfection, of Maud S; 
Peter, of Blue Peter: Petit Pois, of Auvergne; Petit Pois de 
Paris, of Hotspur; Peulen, of Edible Podded; Philadelphia 
Extra Early, of Rural New Yorker; Pierre, of Prince Albert; 
Plant's Early Dwarf, of Tom Thumb; Plus hatif, of Early 



INDEX 



129 



Frame; Pois a grain ride vert, of Alpha: Poor Man's Profit, of 
Dwarf Marrowfat; Poynters First and Best, of Poynter Earliest 
and Best; Prime, of Early Emperor; Prince Albert, of Early 
Frame; Prince of Wales, of Early Princess, erroneously, and of 
McLean Wonderful; Princess, of McLean Wonderful; Princess 
of Wales, of Early Princess: Princesse, of Tall Marrowfat; 
Prodige, of Early Emperor; Prodigious, of Prince Edward; 
Prolific Isle of France, of Branching Marrow; Prosperity, of 
Gradus; Prussian Blue, of Blue Prussian; Quality, of The Don; 
Queen of the Marrows, of British Queen: Racehorse, of Cedo 
Nulle and of Early Warwick; Reed's Early Prize, of Dwarf 
Prize: Ribbon Stalk, of Rose or Crown; Ringleader, of Dillis- 
tone Early. Rising Sun, of Early Emperor and of Prizetaker; 
Rouncival, of Alaska types (?); Royal Belshazzar, of Grimstone 
Egyptian: Royal Dwarf, of Dwarf Marrowfat and of Tom 
Thumb; Royal Prolific, of Dwarf Marrowfat; Ruhm von Cas- 
sel, of Glory of Cassel: Rural New Yorker, of Philadelphia 
Extra Early and of Sangster No. 1 ; Russell's Early Blossom, of 
Hotspur: Sabre, of Blue Imperial and of Blue Scimetar; St. 
Helier's or St. Peter's Marrow, of British Queen; Sans parch- 
emin, of Edible Podded; Sangster's New, of Daniel O'Rourke; 
Sangster's No. 1. of Caractacus and of Early Frame; Sans- 
pareil, of Tall Marrowfat; Sarry, of Victoria; Scimetar, of 
Auvergne; Scymetar, of Blue Imperial; Sebastopol, of Daniel 
O'Rourke and of Sangster No. 1; Selected Extra Early, of 
Sangster No. 1; Serpette, of Auvergne; Serpette nain vert, of 
William Hurst: Serpette vert, of Laxton Supreme; Sharpe's 
First Early, of Sangster No. 1; Sinclair's Early, of Cedo Nulli; 
Single Blossom Early Frame, of Dillistone Early; Skillings Early 
Marrow, of Shilling Grotto: Small Early French, of Auvergne; 
South Sea, of Tall Green Marrow; Spanish Moratto, of Spanish 
Mulatto: Stevenson's Railway, of Cedo Nulli and of Early 
Emperor: Stowe Prolific, of Dwarf Marrowfat; Strawberry, of 
Tom Thumb; Strawberry Vine, of Bishop Longpod; Stubb's 
Blue Marrow and Stubb's New Dwarf, of Burbidge Eclipse; 
Suisse, of Tall Marrowfat: Sumatra Dwarf, of Blue Imperial; 
Superfine Double Early, of Early Frame: Superfine Early, of 
Hotspur; Sutton's Champion, of Sangster No. 1; Sutton's 
Earliest of All and Sutton's No. 1 Green, of Emerald Gem; 
Sutton's Improved Early Champion, of Sangster No. 1 ; Sutton's 
Ringleader, of Railway; Taber's Perfection, of Caractacus and of 



Sangster No. 1 ; Tall Black Rounceval, of Black Eyed Marrow- 
fat; Tall Black Spotted Marotta, of Spanish Mulatto: Tall 
Carolina, of Tall Marrowfat; Tall Green Imperial, of Blue 
Imperial; Tall Green Mammoth, of Competitor; Tall Prussian, 
of Dwarf Marrowfat; Taylor's Early, of Taylor Prolific; Tor- 
woodlee, of Dickson Favorite; Tree Pea Eccentric, of Rose or 
Crown; Tres hatif de May, of Early May; Tres nain de Brest 
and Tres nain de Bretagne, of Dwarf Brittany; Triple X Extra 
Early, of Best Extra Early; True May, of Early Washington; 
Turc, of Rose or Crown; Turner's Royal Dwarf, of Tom Thumb; 
Twesley Dwarf, of Charlton; Up-to-date, of Daisy, incorrectly; 
Valley Field, of Tall Green Marrow; Veitch's First Early, of 
Sangster No. 1; Very Fine Late Garden, of Charlton; Vert 
a rames de Mont Julien, of Early Frame; Wabash, of Dwarf 
Marrowfat; Washington, of Caractacus, of Early Washington, 
of Sangster No. 1; Ward Incomparable, of British Queen; 
Warner's Conqueror, of Sutton Early Champion; Warner's 
Early Conqueror, of Early Emperor; Waterloo Marrow, of 
Victoria; White Boiling, of Hotspur; White Crown, of Rose or 
Crown; White Prolific, of Dwarf Marrowfat; White Rounceval, 
of Marrowfat; White Royal Dwarf Marrowfat and White 
Russian, of Dwarf Marrowfat; White Sabre, of Auvergne; 
Wiltfong, of Pride of Caheunga; Wonder, of Dickson Favorite 
and British Queen; Wonder of the World, of British Queen; 
Woodford's Green Marrow, of Blue Prussian; Wrench's Early 
Hotspur, of Charlton; Wrench's White Union, of Dwarf Mar- 
rowfat; Yorkshire Hero, of McLean Wonderful; Young's Very 
Early, of Early Frame; Zucker-Erbsen, of Edible Podded 



Telephone group, characteristics, 73; major varieties, 74; minor 

varieties, 109 
Theophrastus, notes on history of peas, 5 
Tom Thumb group, characteristics, 33; history, 33; major varieties, 

33; minor varieties, 86 
Turner, Thomas, note on history of peas, 6 

u 

Undescribed varieties (see Varieties, undescribed) 



Varieties of peas described : 
A 1, 105 

Abundance, Bliss, 67 
Abundance, Sutton, mentioned, 

67 
Acacia, 95 
Acme, 109 
Acme, Wood, 109 
Acquisition, 50 
Admiral, 53 
Admiral Beatty, 76 
Admiral Dewey Gem group), 

99 
Admiral Dewey ' Telephone 

group), 75 
Admiral, Green, 54 
Advance, 90 
Advance Guard, 114 
Advancer, 66 
Ajax, 95 
Alaska, 40 
Alderman, 75 
Allan Canner. 53 
Allan Extra Early, 86 
Alliance, 54 
Alliance, Sutton, 73 
Allotment Holder, 96 
Alpha, 67 

Amateur Pride, 113 
Ambler Magnum Bonum, 106 
Ameer, 49 

American Beauty, 108 
American Champion, 110 
American Dwarf, 36 
American Marrow, 88 
American Wonder, 58 
Andersonian Mummy, 37 
Angell Premier, 99 
Angell Triumph, 99 
Annonay Very Early, 87 
Anticipation, 108 
Arcadian, 101 
Aristocrat, 112 
Aroostook Marrowfat, 88 
Astonisher, 106 
Atlantic, 91 
Austral, 64 



V 



Autocrat, 72 
Auvergne, 42 

Banksian Marrow, 91 

Batt Wonder, 91 

Battleship, 106 

Beck Morning Star, 84 

Beck Prizetaker, 46 

Bedalean, 83 

Bedford Champion, 101 

Bedman Imperial, 89 

Bell. 112 

Bellamy Early Green Marrow, 

93 
Benefactor, 92 
Bergen Fleetwing, 31 
Berkshire Hero, 93 
Best Extra Early, 30 
Best of All, McLean, 63 
Best of All, Sutton, 77 
Bestever, 102 
Beurre, 81 
Big Marvel, 68 
Bishop Dwarf, 33 
Bishop Long-pod, 34 
Black-eyed Marrowfat, 38 
Bliss Abundance, 67 
Bliss Everbearing, 98 
Blue Bantam, 62 
Blue Beauty, 90 
Blue Imperial, 89 
Blue Peter, 47 
Blue Prussian, 39 
Blue Ribbon Chieftain, 86 
Blue Scimitar, 42 
Blue Sickle, 91 
Blue Spanish Dwarf, 91 
Blue Wrinkled, 101 
Booth Early, 83 
Boston Extra Early, 84 
Boston Unrivalled, 75 
Boston Wrinkled, 106 
Branching Marrow, 88 
Breck Excelsior, 29 
British Queen, 57 
British Wonder, 65 



Britisher, 92 
Broadsword, 80 

Brown New Dwarf Early Mar- 
rowfat, 36 
Budlong, 85 
Buist Extra Early, 84 
Burbidge Eclipse, 46 
Burpee Extra Early, 29 
Burpee Quality, 105 
Burpee Quantity, 105 
Butter Sugar, 81 
Buttercup, 65 

C. P. R., 105 

Cable, 98 

California Gem, 101 
California Mammoth-podded 

Sugar Marrowfat, 88 
Canada Extra Early, 85 
Canners' Champion, 115 
Canners' Gem, 60 
Canners' Perfection, 67 
Canning, 97 
Captain Cuttle, 109 
Caractacus, 28 
Carolina, 88 
Carpenter Express, 84 
Carter Daisy, 53 
Carter Hundredfold, 43 
Carter International, 91 
Carter Invicta, 89 
Carter New, 84 
Carter Surprise, 91 
Cedo Nulli, 83 
Censor, 109 
Centenary, 111 
Centenary Marrowfat ,111 
Challenger, 93 
Champion of England, 69 
Champion of Scotland, 55 
Charlton, 23 
Charlton Victory, 115 
Charmer, 113 
Chelsea Gem, 51 
Chelsea Rival, 52 
Chelsonian, 108 



Chieftain, 115 

Chieftain, Blue Ribbon. 86 

Childs Morning Star, 105 

Chocolate, 82 

Clatawa, 104 

Claudit, 49, 50 

Clibran Masterpiece, 51 

Climax, 70 

Clipper smooth), 90 

Clipper (wrinkled), 112 

Colossus, 110 

Common Dwarf Crooked Sugar, 

79 
Common Dwarf Sugar, 79 
Commander, 104 
Commander in Chief, 107 
Competitor, 93 
Concordia, 90 
Connoisseur, 65 

Laxton, 107 

Conqueror, 71 
Continuity, 109 
Councillor, 94 
Cracker Jacks, 105 
Criterion, 97 
Crown, 87 
Crown Prince, 96 

Daffodil, 103 

Dainty Duchess, 104 

Daisy, 53 

Danby Stratagem, 67 

Dandy Extra Early, 85 

Dancer Monastery, 88 

Danecroft Rival, 83 

Daniel O'Rourke, 26 

Daniels Matchless Marrow, 100 

Dark Green Pod, 1 1 2 

Darling Gem, 58 

Davis Perfection, 67 

De Giorgi Model, 106 

Deacon Double Extra Early, 84 

Defiance, 104 

Delicacy, 106 

Delicates, 77 

Delicatesse, 77 



130 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Delicia, 52 

Delicious, 98 

Denyer Prolific Green Marrow, 

93 
Despatch, 94 
Despot, 85 
Dexter, 28 

Dickson Favorite. 44 
Dickson First and Best, 27 
Dillistone Early, 84 
Discovery, 62 
Dr. Hogg, 113 
Dr. McLean, 104 
Don, 108 

Double Extra Early, 84 
Dreadnought, 109 
Drew Dwarf, 98 
Duchess, 110 
Duchess of York, 55 
Duke Delight, 60 
Duke of Albany, 75 
Duke of Edinburg, 110 
Duke of York, 75 
Dunnett First Early, 84 
Durban Market Garden, 99 
Dwarf Brittany, 86 
Dwarf Capucin, 79 
Dwarf Champion, 64 
Dwarf Champion of England, 64 
Dwarf Crooked Podded Sugar, 

79 
Dwarf Debarbieux, 79 
Dwarf Defiance, 68 
Dwarf Fan, 33 
Dwarf Giant Podded, 81, 103 
Dwarf Gradus, 54 
Dwarf Gray Edible Podded, 81 
Dwarf Gray Sugar, 81 
Dwarf Green St. Michael, 93 
Dwarf Green Wrinkled Marrow, 

94 
Dwarf Jumbo, 103 
Dwarf Main Crop, 101 
Dwarf Marrowfat, 36 
Dwarf Perfection, 101 
Dwarf Prize, 87 
Dwarf Prolific, 101 
Dwarf Royal Edible Pod, 79 
Dwarf Rural New Yorker, 87 
Dwarf Telephone, 61 
Dwarf Waterloo, 87 
Dwarf White Edible Podded, 80 
Dwarf White Sugar, 79, 80 

Earliest and Best, Poynter, 84 
Earliest Blue, 90 
Earliest Market, 85 
Earliest Marrow, 57 
Earliest of All, 40 

Maule, 90 

Earliest Perfection, 91 

Earliest Springtime, 92 

Earliest Table Marrow, 95 

Early Bird, 48 

Early Burlington, 83 

Early but Good, 100 

Early Champion, Fairhead, 83 

Early Champion, Sutton, 26 

Early Dixie, 86 

Early Duke, 104 

Early Dwarf, 83, 86 

Early Dwarf de Grace, 79 

Early Dwarf Dutch, 79 

Sugar, 79 

Early Dwarf or Prince Arthur, 

102 
Early Emperor, 25 
Early Epicure, 98 
Early Excelsior, 60 
Early Frame, 23 
Early Giant, 96 
Early Green Marrow, 90 
Early June, 83 
Early Kent, 26 
Early Lexington, 52 
Early Market, Hartner's, 46 
Early Marvel, 94 
Early May, 26 
Early Morn, 61 



Early Morning, 85 

Early Morning Star, 85 

Early Nimble Dick, 83 

Early Princess, 84 

Early Record, 92 

Early Somerset, 42 

Early Sugar, 79 

Early Sugar Marrowfat, 88 

Early Superb, 50 

Early Warwick, 24 

Early Washington, 24 

East Hartford, 28 

Eastern Shore, 83 

Echo, 99 

Eckford Centenary, 111 

Eckford Perpetual, 108 

Eckford Victor, 102 

Eclipse, Burbidge, 46 

Eclipse (smooth), 40 

Eclipse (wrinkled), 99 

Edible Podded Butter, 81 

Edible Podded Dwarf, 79 

Edinburg Beauty, 104 

Edward VII, 97 

Edwin Becket, 103 

Egg, 37 

Eight Weeks, 46 

El Paso Wonder, 101 

Eldorado, 94 

Electric, 84, 85, 90, 100 

Ely Extra Early, 85 

Emerald Gem, 28 

Emperor of Marrows, 98 

Empire State, 99 

Empress of India, 110 

English Wonder, 59 

Enormous, 110 

Epicure, 110 

Erfurt Early Dwarf White Mar- 
row, 88 

Essex Star, 50 

Etampes Wonder, 91 

Eugenie, 54 

Eureka, 77 

Eureka Extra Early, 31 

Everbearing, Bliss, 98 

Evergreen, 91 

Evergreen Pod, 85 

Eversure, 86 

Evolution, 49 

Excelsior, Breck, 29 

Excelsior, Fairhead, 107 

Excelsior, Nott, 59 

Excelsior, Sutton, 65 

Exhibition, 111 

Exhibition Marrowfat, 110 

Exonian, 105 

Express, 90 

Express, Carpenter, 84 

Extra Early Challenge, 85 

Extra Early Dwarf Brittany, 79 

Extra Early Dwarf Edible Pod, 
79 

Extra Early Edible Podded, 80 

Extra Early Honey Sweet, 99 

Extra Early Manifold, 99 

Extra Early Market, 31 

Extra Early Market Garden, 85 

Extra Early Pioneer, 32 

Extra Early Winship, 84 

Fairbeard Nonpareil, 56 
Fairhead Early Champion, 83 
Fairhead Early Conqueror, 83 
Fairhead Excelsior, 107 
Family Garden, 85 
Far-famed Sir Moot, 84 
Faust Extra Early, 85 
Favorite, 105 
Favorite, Dickson, 44 

Lye. 91 

Ferry Extra Early, 84 

— First and Best, 29 
Fillbasket, 47 
First and Best, 31 
First and Best, Dickson, 27 
First and Best, Ferry, 29 
First and Earliest, 90 
First Crop, 27 



First Crop Blue, 89 
First Early, 32 
First in Market, 30 
First of All, Henderson, 29 
Fishamend Sugar, 82 
Flack Imperial, 39 
Flack Victory, 39 
Florida McNeil, 87 
Forty Days, 80 
Forty Fold, 70 
Forty Two Days, 85 
Free Bearer, 70 
Freedom, 114 
French Dwarf Sugar, 81 
French Sugar, 82 
Full Crop, 112 

G. F. Wilson, 72 

Garbutt Amazon, 93 

Garden Pride, 87 

Gardeners' Favorite, 105 

Gem of the Season, 85 

Germania, 95 

Giant Butter, 81 

Giant Exhibition, 114 

Giant Florentine, 82 

Giant Laxtonian, 63 

Giant Lightning, 30 

Giant-podded Little Midget, 100 

Giant-podded Marrow, 88 

Giant Stride, 101 

Giant Sugar, 82 

Giant Switzerland, 82 

Giant White, 81 

Gladiator, 93 

Gladstone, 77 

Glory, 45 

Gilson, 45 

Harrison, 47 

Johnson, 92 

Glory of Cassel, 91 
Glory of Devon, 114 
Glory of Somerset, 97 
Gold von Blocksburg, 91 
Golden King, 111 
Goldfinder, 108 
Goliath, 110 

Good Luck, 86, 103 
Good Indeed, 112 
Good Marrow, 88 
Goodwin Prizewinner, 90 
Gradus, 54 
Grant Favorite, 108 
Grand Monarch, 94 
Great Eastern, 88 
Green Admiral, 54 
Green Gem, 103 
Green Noyon, 93 
Green Pod, 100 
Green Prolific, 100 
Gregory Surprise, 59 
Grey Sugar, 82 
Griffin, 89 

Grimstone Egyptian, 36 
Groom Superb, 46 
Grotto, 88 

Hairs Dwarf Marrow, 106 
Hampden Earliest, 85 
Hancock, 84 
Harbinger, Sutton, 51 
Harrison Glory, 47 
Harrison Perfection, 44 
Hartner Early Market, 95 
Hartner Miracle, 95 
Harvester, 63 
Harvestman, 111 
Hay Mammoth, 56 
Heinrich Earliest, 80 
Henderson First of All, 29 
Herald, 99 
Heroine, 77 
Hill Extra Early, 83 
Hobbies Prizewinner, 110 
Home Delight, 105 
Home Garden, 111 
Honev Sweets, 99 
Horaf, 41 
Horsford Market Garden, 64 



Hotspur, 23 

Hovey Extra Early, 83 

Hundredfold, Carter, 43 

Hundredfold, Sutton, 52 

Hurst International, 92 

Hustler, 41 

Hustlers, The, 90 

Ideal, 102 
Imperator, 113 
Imperial Blue, 89, 94 
Imperial Champion, 101 
Improved Giant Sword, 80 
Improved Green Marrow, 93 
Improved Sugar Marrow, 37 
Incomparable, 97 
Indianapolis Market, 90 
International, Carter, 91 

Hurst, 92 

Invicta, Carter, 89 

- Kentish, 40 
Invincible, 109 
Iowa Challenge, 29 
Isbell Beauty, 53 

James Kelway, 114 

James Prolific Wrinkled Mar- 
row, 97 

Jeyes Conqueror, 71 

John Bull (Senator group), 115 

John Bull (Stratagem group), 
106 

John L, 32 

Johnson & Stokes Extra Early, 
85 

Johnson Glory, 92 

Johnson Victor, 92 

Jubilant, 95 

June, 89 

Juno, 72 

Keeney Extra Early, 86 

Kelvedonian, 107 

Kelway Beauty, 46 

Kenilworth, 93 

Kentish, 89 

Kentish Invicta, 40 

King Edward, 73 

King Edward VII, 103 

King of the Dwarfs, 98 

King of the Marrows, 107 

Klondike, 92 

Knight Dwarf Marrow Sugar, 81 

Knight Marrows, 56, 69 

Lady Finger, 87 
Lancashire Lad, 104 
Landreth Extra Early, 24 
Langport, 57 
Large Crooked Sugar, 80 
Large Green Normandy, 93 
Large-podded Alaska, 90 
Large White Edible Pod, 80 
Large White Marrowfat, 36 
Late Dwarf Sugar, 80 
Late Gradus, 112 
Late Queen, 109 
Late Wyker Sugar, 81 
Latest of All, 72 
Laxton Connoisseur, 107 
Laxton Progress, 63 
Laxton Superlative, 74 
Laxton Supreme, 43 
Laxtonian, 62 
Laxtonian Hybrid, 104 
Leader, 47 
Ledman Dwarf, 79 
Lee Earliest, 85 
Leicester Defiance, 93 
Leopold II, 37 
Leviathan, 97 
Liberty, 73 
Lightning, 30 
Lightning Excelsior, 31 
Lightning Express, 32 

Giant, 30 

Lincoln, 53 
Little Gem, 57 
Little Marvel, 59 



INDEX 



131 



Little Midget. 100 

Little Wonder. 107 

Livingston First Choice, 106 

Long-pod Alaska, 90 

Long-podded Alaska, 90 

Longfellow, 112 

Longstander, 109 

Lord Leicester, 112 

Lord Kitchener, 112 

Lord Raglan, 107 

Lord Roberts, 109 

Lucious Sugar, 82 

Lye Favorite, 91 

Lynn Wrinkled Marrow, 96 

McBeth Pride, 90 
McLean Best of All, 63 
McLean First and Best, 86 
McLean First of All, 90 
McLean Prolific, 97 
McLean Wonderful, 96 
McNeil. 87 
Magnificent, 108 
Magnum Bonum, 70 
Magnum Bonum, Ambler, 106 
Magnum Bonum Marrowfat, 

110 
Maincrop, 113, 114 
Majestic, 106 

Mammoth Extra Early, 94 
Mammoth-pod Sugar, 82 
Marblehead Early Marrowfat, 

37 
Marchioness, 63 
Market Gardener, 112 
Market Master, 103 
Market Surprise, 41 
Marvel, 100 
Marvellous, 52 
Maryland Pride, 109 
Masterpiece, 111 

Clibran, 51 

Matchless, 100 

Matchless Marrowfat, 87 

Matchless Wonder, 103 

Maud S, 29 

Maule Earliest of All, 90 

Maule Extra Early, 85 

Mauretania, 86 

Maximus, 86 

May Queen, 94 

Mayflower, 103 

Mayor, 105 

Melbourne Market, 100 

Melting Marrow, 96 

Melting Marrow Edible Podded, 

80 
Melting Sugar, 80 
Michaux de Hollande, 83 
relation to 

Early Emperor, 25 
Michaux de Rouelle, 83 
Michaux ordinaire, 83 
M-o-de Paris, relation to Early 

Emperor, 25 
Midsummer, 110 
Mighty Atom, 95 
Milford Marrowfat, 87 
Minimum, 51 
Miracle, Hartner, 46 
Missouri Marrowfat, 37 
Model, De Giorgi, 106 
Model Mayflower, 103 
Monarch, 107, 111 
Monarch of Earlies, 86 
Monastery, 88 
Monster-podded Extra Early, 

32 
Morning Glory, 92 
Morning Star, Beck, 84 

Buist, 85 

Childs, 105 

Mossy-podded, 88 
Mt. Ranier, 104 

Nabob, 95 
Napoleon, 70 
Ne Plus Ultra, 71 
Nebraska Lightning, 85 



New Era, 52 

New Life, 68 

New York Market, 85 

Nippon Saya, 79 

Noble Early Green Marrow, 93 

Nonpareil, 39 

Nonpareil, Fairbeard, 56 

Nonsuch, 89 

Northern Wonder, 87 

Northwest Premier, 86 

Nott Excelsior, 59 

Nott Perfection, 99 

Nott Prolific, 106 

Ohio Chief, 33 

Old Colony, 106 

Old England, 92 

Old Glory, 50 

Omega, 107 

100 c r Profit, 99 

Onward, 63 

Orange County Morning Star, 

85 
Oxonian, 105 
Oyster Pea, 88 

Paradise Marrow, 37 

Paragon, 107 

Payne Conqueror, 71 

Peabody, 87 

Peacemaker (Daisy section), 104 

Peacemaker (Telephone group), 

113 
Pedigree Extra Early, 30 
Pedigree First and Best, 86 
Peerless Extra Early, 86 
Peerless Marrowfat, 110 
Perfect, 103 
Perfect Early, 95 
Perfect Gem, 99 
Perfection, Canners, 67 
Perfection, Davis, 67 
Perfection (Extra Early group), 

86 
Perfection, Harrison, 44 
Perfection (Large-podded Dwarf 

group), 102 
Perfection, Nott, 99 
Perfection Sugar, 80 
Perfection, Taber Early, 84 
Perfection, Veitch, 71 
Perpetual Bearing, 108 
Perpetual, Sutton, 111 
Peruvian Black-eyed Marrow, 89 
Peter Pan, 62 
Petersburg, 84 

Petit Pois, smooth-seeded, 42 
Petit Pois, wrinkled, 77 
Petoskey, 111 
Phenomenon, 114 
Philadelphia Extra Early, 28 
Phonograph, 110 
Pierremont Gem, 102 
Pilot, 45 
Pioneer, 62 
Pioneer, Sutton, 52 
Plant Extra Early, 85 
Plentiful, 113 
Popular, 107 
Potlatch, 68 

Poynter Earliest and Best, 84 
Premier, 111 
Premier Angell, 99 
Premier Extra Early, 85 
Premium Gem, 58 
Prerao, 45 
President, 114 
President Wilson, 101 
Prestige, 55 
Pride of America, 106 
Pride of Cahuenga, 105 
Pride of the Garden Golden 

Butter, 81 
Pride of the Market, 48 
Primo Pilot, 45 
Prince Albert, 25 
Prince Arthur, 102 
Prince Bismarck, 79 
Prince Edward, 76 



Prince of Peas, 109 

Prince of Wales, 56 

Princess of Wales, 104 

Princess Royal, 88 

Prizetaker (Dimpled-seeded 

group), 46 
Prizetaker (Telephone group I , 

113 
Prize Taker Green Marrow, 46 
Prizewinner, 110 
Prizewinner, Goodwin, 90 
Prizewinner, Hobbies, 110 
Prodigious, 76 
Productive Marrowfat, 100 
Profusion, 55 
Progress, 105 
Progress, Laxton, 63 
Prolific, 96 
Prolific Early, 32 
Prolific Early Market, 32 
Prolific Extra Early, 32 
Prolific Giant Podded. 81 
Prolific Long-pod, 45 

Quality, 105 
Quantity, 105 
Queen, 109 

Queen of the Dwarfs, 87 
Queen of the Marrows, 57 
Queen, Rennie, 64 
Queen, Sharpe, 64 
Quite Content, 76 

Racehorse, 83 

Racket, 105 

Radio, 46 

Railway, 83 

Rapid (Le Rapide), 90 

Reading Gem, 65 

Reading Wonder, 51 

Rearguard, 114 

Record, 104 

Record Breaker, 86 

Record Breaker Six Weeks, 102 

Record Extra Early, 85 

Red Flowered Sugar, 82 

Reedland, 84 

Referendum, 95 

Regal, 101 

Reliance, 109 

Rennie Queen, 64 

Renown, 102 

Rent Payer, 106 

Rentpayer, 100 

Rice Extra Early, 32 

Rice No. 13, 78 

Rice No. 330, 41 

Richard Seddon, 60 

Ringleader, 27 

Rising Sun, 93 

Rivenhall Wonder, 60 

Rogers Winner, 41 

Rose or Crown, 87 

Rough Rider, 111 

Routledge Prize, 73 

Royal Blue, 93 

Royal Dwarf, 36 

Royal Early, 97 

Royal Salute, 55 

Rural New Yorker, 29 

Russell Early, 83 

Sabel, 80 

Sabre, 43 

Saginaw Valley Pride, 90 

Saint-Desirat Melting, 80 

St. Duthus, 113 

Salad Sugar, 82 

Sander Marrow, 108 

Sangster No. 1, 26 

Sapphire, 91 

Satisfaction, 63 

Saxonia, 33 

Schwert, 80 

Scimitar, 42 

Scimitar, Blue, 42 

Scimitar (Sugar), 80 

Scorcher, 90 

Scotch Champion, 107 



Sebastopol, 84 

Senator, 76 

Sensation, 101 

Seedling Market, 113 

Shah, The, 98 

Sharpe Invincible, 109 

Sharpe Queen, 64 

Sharpe Standard, 111 

Sharpe Triumph, 68 

Sherwood, 68 

Shilling Grotto, 88 

Short-straw Marrow, 88 

Shropshire Hero, 77 

Sickle, 8, 42 

Sickle, Blue, 91 

Sickle, White, 42 

Sir Arthur Bignold, 97 

Sitka, 90 

Six Weeks White Sugar, 80 

Smilax, 89 

Smith Extra Early, 85 

Snowdrop, 73 

Snowflake, 85 

Spanish Dwarf, 33 

Spanish Mulatto, 89 

Special Extra Early, 86 

Springtide, 88 

Standard, 11 

Stanley, 113 

Star of Australia, 114 

Startler, 105 

Station, 58 

Sterling, 114 

Stradsett Marrow, 88 

Stratagem, 67 

Stratagem, Danby, 67 

Strawberry, 87 

Sugar, 80, 82 

Sugar peas (see Edible-podded) 

Summer Queen, 111 

Summit, 31 

Sunol, 32 

Sunrise, 45 

Sunrise Blue, 94 

Superb, 50 

Superb Early Dwarf, 66 

Superb Marrow, 101 

Superfine Early, 83 

Superior First Early, 83 

Superlative, Laxton, 74 

Superlative, Sutton, 111 

Supplanter, 113 

Supreme, Laxton, 43 

Supreme, Sutton, 66 

Surprise, 59 

Surprise, Carter, 91 

Sutton Abundance, 67, 105 

Sutton Alliance, 73 

Sutton Early Champion, 26 

Sutton Early Gem, 98 

Sutton Excelsior, 65 

Sutton Exhibition Marrowfat 

110 
Sutton Favorite, 102 
Sutton Forcing, 100 
Sutton Harbinger, 51 
Sutton Hundredfold, 52 
Sutton Incomparable, 102 
Sutton Invincible, 109 
Sutton King of the Dwarfs, 98 
Sutton Masterpiece, 111 
Sutton Matchless. 108 
Sutton Matchless Marrowfat. 

100 
Sutton May Queen, 99 
Sutton Perfection, 100 
Sutton Perpetual, 111 
Sutton Pioneer, 52 
Sutton Prolific Marrow, 97 
Sutton Seedling, 96 
Sutton Superlative, 111 
Sutton Supreme, 66 
Swastika, 103 
Sweet Market, 96 
Swiss, 79 
Sword Sugar, 80 

Taber Early Perfection, 84 
Talisman, 92 



132 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Tall Butter Sugar, 81 

Tall Edible Podded, 81 

Tall Frame, 83 

Tall Gray Sugar, 81, 82 

Tall Green Mammoth, 107 

Tall Green Marrow, 92 

Tall Half Sugar, 80 

Tall Late Sugar, 81 

Tall Marrowfat, 35 

Tall Moerheim Giant White, 81 

Tall Sugar, 81 

Tall Telephone, 75 

Tamarind, 80 

Taylor Prolific, 83 

Te Aroha. 103 

Teddy Roosevelt, 111 

Telegraph idimpled-seeded), 48 

Telegraph ( smooth-seeded i, 89 

Telephone, 74 

Telephone, Tall, 75 

Thick Podded Butter, 81 

Thomas Laxton, 63, 72 

Thurston Reliance, 88 

Tiptop, 94 

Tom Thumb (smooth), 33 

Tom Thumb (wrinkled), 99 

Tom Thumb Plentiful, 99 

Varieties undescribed: 

Abbott of Bardney, Abbott of Reading, Allan No. 1, Allen Superb, 
American Racer, Bedford Star, Bedford Wonder, Bennett 
Green Prolific, Blue Gem, Blue Mohawk, Boquet, Branching 
Prolific, Breck, Canners' Favorite, Carsten Prolific Dwarf, 
Carter Elephant, Chancelot, Cheltonian, Cleveland Market, 
Chbran Abundant, Clibran Hale Perfection, Crosby Hybrid, 
Dainty, Dewdrop, Dwarf Blue Caper, Early Cluster, Early 
Bank Balance, Early French, Early Magog, Early Norther, 
Early of Earlies, Early Queen, Early Woodside, Early Wrinkle, 
Encore, Erfurt Early Dwarf Green Marrow, Erfurt Earliest 
May, Extra Early Deposit, Fame, Free Trade, George Clelland, 
Glory of England, Finchley Wonder, Forerunner, Golden Gem, 
Green Feast, Hawkin's Market Garden, Hero, Inexhaustible, 
Island Prolific, Keen Early Seedling, Keith First on Market, 
King of the Market, Kinver Gem, Liliputian, Lilly-Bogardus 
Thoroughbred, Little Giant, Magdebourg Gold, Mammoth 
Beauty, Market Gardeners Favorite, Neapolitan, New York 
Mammoth, Niles, New Dominion, Northern Leader, Northern 
Queen, Perpetual Early Prize, Plymouth Rock, Pole, Prelude, 
Pride of Denver, Pride of Georgia, Pride of the Garden, Prize 
Early, Puget Sound, Puritan, Ratekin New Wonder, Read 
Favorite, Remarkable, Royal Bengal Mammoth Prolific 



Top Notcher, 112 

Top o' th' Morn, 102 

Trailblazer, 63 

Triumph, 86 

Triumph, Angell, 99 

Triumph, Sharpe, 68 

True May, 83 

Twentieth Century Giant, 94 

Union Jack, 114 
Unique, 113 
Universal, 98 
Up-to-date, 112 

V. C, 76 

Vanguard (dimpled-seeded), 94 
Vanguard (wrinkled, cream- 
seeded I, 95 
Vaughan Forcing, 99 
Veitch Maincrop, 114 
Veitch Perfection, 71 
Veitch Selected Extra Early, 84 
Veitch Victor, 104 
Velocity, 90 
Vermont Wonder, 98 
Very Dwarf Cotourier, 87 
Very Dwarf Dutch Frame, 79 



Very Dwarf White Sugar, 79 
Very Dwarf Wrinkled, 98 
Very Early Dwarf, 79 
Vick Dwarf, 98 

Extra Early, 84 

First Choice, 96 

— King of the Dwarfs, 98 
Victor, 102 

Victor Marrowfat, 102, 103 
Victoria Marrow, 36 
Victory, 75 

Victory, Charlton, 115 
Vigorosa, 105 
Vilmorin Edible-podded, 81 

Walker Perpetual, 108 
Warlock Prize, 101 
Warrior, 92 

Washington Wonder, 99 
Welcome, 94 
Wellington, 88 
Wheeler Extra Early, 84 
White-eyed Marrowfat, 89 
White Gem, 95 
White Podded Sugar, 82 
White Prolific Marrow, 96 
White Scimitar, 42 



White Sickle, 42 

White Sugar, 80 

William Hurst, 58 

William Richardson, 112 

William the Conqueror, 45 

William the First, 45 

Wilson Improved Extra Early, 

85 
Winner, 41 
Witham Wonder, 59 
Wonder of Holland, 95 
Wonder Worker, 96 
Wood Acme, 109 
Wonderful, 50 
Wonderful Extra Early, 94 
Woodford Marrow, 39 
World Beater, 50 
World Record, 61 
Wrinkled, Edible-podded, 81 
Wrinkled Sugar, 81 

Yankee Prince, 112 
Yankton Maincrop, 105 
Yellow Podded Sugar, 81 
Yorkshire, 91 
Yorkshire Gem, 97 
Yorkshire Hero, 63 



Wonder, Prima Vera, Saxa, Second Crop, Second Early, Second 
Early Market Garden, Shilling Queen, Southern Queen, Stand- 
ard Early, Standard Late, Standard Midseason, Strasburg, 
Strategy, Trant Evergreen, Tuxedo, Vermont, Vick Nos. 
1, 2, 3, Vilmorin Blue Wrinkled, Vilmorin Marrow, Warriston 
Wonder, White Brunswick, White Champion, White Rose, 
Wife's Pin Money, Wisbeck Wonder, Woodruff Wonder, World 
Gem. 

Varieties of peas, groups of, 20 

Vetch, ax, 12, 13 

Vicia, description of genus, 1 1 

Vicia Ervilia, relation to pea, 12 

Vicia {aba, relation to pea, 11 

Vicia, minor species of, 12; varieties of, 11 

Vicieae, genera of, 10; relation to pea, 10 

Vick, James, pea breeder, 9 

Virgil, pea known to, 5 

w 

Worlidge, John, classification of peas by, 6 

Wrinkled, Cream-seeded group, characteristics, 51; major varieties, 
51; minor varieties, 93 



BEANS OF NEW YORK 



BEING 



VOL. 1— PART II 



OF 



VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 









New York Agricultural Experiment Station 
Geneva, N.Y. Oct. 17, 1934 




Dear Madam: 




It is a pleasure indeed to have you 




sent Vol. I, part 2 of "The Vegetables 




of New York", in accordance with your 




request. 




Very truly yours,^ . 




Director. 







STATE OF NEW YORK — EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 

THE 

VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 

BY 
U. P. HEDRICK 

ASSISTED BY 
W. T. TAPLEY 
G. P. VAN ESELTINE 
W. D. ENZIE 

REPORT OF THE 
NEW YORK STATE AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION 
FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 30, 1931 



LIBRARY 
NEW YORK 
BOTANICAL 







ALBANY 

J. B. LYON COMPANY, PRINTERS 

1931 



. ..\v YORK 
BOTANICAL 



PREFACE 

Under authority from the State, Laws of 1925, the New York State Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station is publishing a work entitled The Vegetables of 
New York. The publication is to be issued in three volumes of two or more parts 
each. Part I of Volume I, The Peas of New York was printed in 1928. The 
publication in hand, The Beans of New York, now appears as Part II of Volume I. 
The Beans of New York does not differ in any material respect in aim or scope 
from the part which has preceded it, to the preface of which the reader is referred 
for a full statement of the several ends in view in these monographs, the considera- 
tions which have governed the selection of varieties and illustrations, and the 
methods of treating synonyms, references, and classifications. 

The statement of authorship which appears on the title page needs a word of 
explanation. The writer, whose name appears as senior author, has had the 
planning of the work and the general supervision of it from start to finish. Chap- 
ters 1 and 2 on the History and Botany of Beans were written by Professor Van 
Eseltine. The remaining chapter, containing general notes, a glossary of terms, 
history, and descriptions of varieties was written by Professor Tapley and Mr. 
Enzie. Mr. F. H. Hall and Mr. L. R. Hawthorn, former members of the Station 
staff, whose names appear in The Peas of New York, did some work with beans 
before Professor Tapley and Mr. Enzie came to the Station. Credit should be 
given to Professor C. B. Sayre, Chief of the Division of Vegetable Crops at this 
Station, for valuable advice. 

, 99 iqcm U. P. HEDRICK 

June 11, lyjl 

** lit 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK. I 



LEGUMES, CUCURBITS, CORN, ALLIUMS, ASPARAGUS 



PART II: BEANS 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER TEXT PAGE 

Preface iii 

I. History of American Garden Beans 3 

Introduction 3 

The Common Bean 4 

The Lima Bean 4 

The Runner Bean 5 

Horticultural Varieties 5 

II. Systematic Botany of Beans, and Their 

Allies 8 

III. Description of Varieties 17 

General Notes 17 

Glossary 19 

The Pole Varieties of Garden Beans . . 20 

Green Pods 20 

Wax Pods 31 

The Dwarf Varieties of Garden Beans. 35 

Green Pods 35 

Wax Pods 54 

The Horticultural or Shell Beans 70 

Pole Varieties 70 

Dwarf Varieties 73 

The Field Beans 74 

The Lima Beans 85 

Pole Varieties 86 

Dwarf Varieties 91 

The Runner Beans 96 

References 99 

Supplementary List of Variety Trials 100 

Index 101 



ILLUSTRATIONS F page G 

Pod Types of Pole Beans 22 

Types of Green Podded Pole Beans 23 

Early Stringless Wax 32 

Types of Wax Podded Pole Beans 33 

Black Valentine 36 

Dwarf Green Pods 37 

Dwarf Green Pods 42 

Dwarf Green Pods 43 

Emerald Beauty 44 

Dwarf Green Pods 45 

Triumph of the Frames 52 

Sunrise 53 

Dwarf Wax Pods 56 

Perpetual or Everbearing Wax 57 

Dwarf Wax Pods 60 

Dwarf Wax Pods 61 

Dwarf Wax Pods 62 

Earliest Market Wax 63 

Profusion Wax 66 

New Wax 67 

Dwarf Wax Pods 68 

Saddle Back Wax 69 

Types of Bean Seeds 72 

Types of Bean Seeds 73 

Perry Marrow 74 

Types of Bean Seeds 75 

Types of Bean Seeds 76 

Types of Bean Seeds 77 

Pod Types of Field Beans 80 

Pod Types of Dwarf Beans 81 

Dreer's Pole Lima 86 

Large Green Seeded 87 

Pod Types of Lima Beans 90 

Enormous Early 92 

Dwarf Sieva 93 

Butterfly Runner 94 

Pod Types of Runner Beans 95 

Scarlet Runner 96 

Jubilee Runner 97 



CHAPTER 1 
HISTORY OF AMERICAN GARDEN BEANS 



The discovery of America very nearly marks the 
beginning of the recorded history of the common, lima, 
and runner beans. Of course, beans had been culti- 
vated for untold years in America before 1492, but 
records are not available or are very scant. Beans, 
both lima and common, have been found in pre-Colum- 
bian Andean tombs and many of the early discoverers 
report a diversity of kinds that suggests a long period 
of cultivation not only on the American continental 
areas but also on the outlying islands. According to 
Gray and Trumbull (Am. Jour. Sci. 26:130. 1883), 
" Three weeks after his first landing in the new world 
Columbus saw, near Nuevitas in Cuba, fields planted 
with ' faxones and fabas very different from those of 
Spain ' and two days afterward, following the north 
coast of Cuba, he again found ' land well cultivated 
with these fexoes and habas much unlike ours.' 
' Faxones ' or ' fexoes ' were — as Navarrete notes 
(Co/ec. i, 200, 203) ' the same as frejoles or judias,' 
Spanish names for kidney beans, . . ." Oriedo 
(1525-35) speaks of there being "many kinds in the 
Indies." Cabeca de Vaca (1528), De Soto (1539), and 
Jacques Cartier (1534) all mention the beans cultivated 
by the natives. 

The earlier belief in the Asiatic origin of the common 
bean and its close allies has been so thoroughly dis- 
proved that it is thought unnecessary to discuss the 
question here. The underlying reasons for this belief 
are noted in De Candolle's Origin of Cultivated 
Plants and their refutation may be found in the works 
of Gray and Trumbull and of Sturtevant as referred to 
in succeeding paragraphs. 

The earliest reference seen to the cultivation of 
beans in Europe is by Fuchs (Fuchsius) in his De 
Historia Stirpium (1542) where he figures on p. 428 
a bush bean and writes of them as " Welsch Bohnen " 
foreign beans. Bock, or Tragus, as his name is latinized, 
pictured the first pole beans in his De Stirpium (1552). 
Following this apparently the spread of these beans 
was fairly rapid as Dodoens (Dodonaeus) figures pole 
beans again in his Frumentorum Leguminum (1566 1, 
as did de l'Obel (Lobelius) in both the Plantarum seu 
Stirpium Historia, p. 511. 1576; and in the Plant- 
arum seu Stirpium /cones. 2:260. 1591. De l'Ecluse 
'Clusiusi in 1601 also figured the pole bean and is 
apparently the first to give an account of the lima bean. 
He gives a very good description and an unmistakable 
figure on page ccxxiii of his Rariorum Plantarum 
Historia where he says that he had received the seed 
from C. V. Purkinje of Posen " late in the year 1576." 
He also notes having received seeds from Spain as 
" Guatemalan beans." It is worth noting that he 
described all forms as " Phaseoli peregrini " or " foreign 
beans." In the 16 kinds mentioned various genera are 
represented. 



What are considered as generic names now were 
used very loosely at that time and indeed for some years 
after the time of Clusius. The term legumes now 
held for members of the bean family was used as broadly 
as the term " grass " is used occasionally at present — 
including not only true grasses but also sedges, alfalfa, 
clover, and other forage plants. 

Bauhin in his Historia Plantarum (1616) described 
a large number of beans, pole and bush, common and 
lima, many of which were reported before 1592. Thus, 
in the century following the discovery of America, bean 
culture had begun to spread through Europe with a fair 
degree of rapidity when account is taken of the poorly 
developed methods of communication existing at the 
time. However, Parkinson, in 1629, speaks of them as 
a rich man's dish, and Worlidge, in 1683, says that 
" within the memory of man they were a great rarity 
though now a common, delicate food." As regards 
the varieties grown Sturtevant notes that Martyn's 
edition of Miller (1724) lists " varieties of bush beans 
which can be identified with those grown at the present 
time, five in all." For detailed notes on the statements 
of early explorers the reader should consult Sturtevant's 
Notes on Edible Plants, pp. 418^28, 1919, and Gray 
and Trumbulls' review of De Candolle's Origin of 
Cultivated Plants in Am. Jour. Sci. 26:130-138. 
1883. Unfortunately, these notes are too numerous to 
be included here. 

The year 1753 with the appearance of the Species 
Plantarum of Linneaus marked the beginning of a 
period of increased and intensive study of plant life 
and a valiant effort to clarify the relationships of forms 
and to organize the almost chaotic mass of knowledge 
concerning vegetation which had been gradually accumu- 
lating during the preceding years. The numerous 
explorations of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries 
had brought into Europe a flood of new plants among 
which were the ubiquitous and always useful beans. 
Linnaeus in his work described the common bean as 
Phaseolus vulgaris, the runner bean as P. coccineus, 
and two forms of the lima as P. lunatus and P. 
inamoenus. Here we have all the names that enter 
into most present-day ideas of the major types of 
American beans, excepting for the moment the Tepary 
bean, which did not attract attention until the beginning 
of the twentieth century. The common beans as a 
group are known as Phaseolus vulgaris; the scarlet 
runner and its various forms are held collectively as 
Phaseolus coccineus; and the lima and its several 
variant forms are united under Phaseolus lunatus. 

All of these beans vary to a considerable extent and 
the numerous extremes of variation have been named 
by various botanists and indeed the same form has 
not infrequently received different names from different 
botanists who were often unaware of the existence of 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



one another's work. One is inclined at first thought to 
believe that this is an occasion of " confusion worse 
confounded," but the condition is not quite so bad as 
that. A more careful study must be made of variations 
in order to clarify the application of this plethora of 
names, but the net result is a clearer appreciation of 
the factors involved than would otherwise be the case. 
In tracing out the history of these beans each group 
must be considered separately. 

The common bean. — The common beans dur- 
ing the first 70 years after the publication of Linneaus' 
Species Plantarum apparently received little atten- 
tion from botanists. Salisbury, in 1796, changed the 
name to Phaseolus esculentus apparently because he 
did not like the name vulgaris; and Zuccarini described 
in 1809 two forms of the common bean as new species, 
one of which he attributed to Jussieu. 

Between 1821 and 1825 Gaetano Savi, Professor of 
Botany at Pisa, published in the Nuovo Giornale de 
Letter at i a series of notes on the genera Phaseolus 
and Dolichos and in the tenth volume (1825) described 
eight forms of the common bean as distinct species. 
One of these was considered true vulgaris; the remain- 
ing seven were new. P. vulgaris was divided into three 
groups, viz., I, seed of a single color; II, seed with 
bands or broad stripes; and III, seed variegated. Group 
I was again separated into 14 sub-groups, based largely 
on the color of the seed; Group II into 10; and Group III 
into 7. The characters upon which the other seven 
species were based were drawn largely from the relative 
dimensions and the appearance of the seeds, although 
pod characters were taken into consideration. 

De Candolle in the Prodromus (1825) followed 
Savi's treatment except for changing the name of one 
(P. romanus) which he called P. compressus from 
the flattened pod and seed, and excepting also the 
omission of the minor subdivisions of Savi's three 
groups of vulgaris. The segregation of P. compressus 
to include the large-seeded, flatter podded types is of 
interest as being analogous to the separation of the 
large flat-podded lima beans from the smaller podded, 
smaller seeded forms. It should perhaps be said here 
that with the increased amount of data on variation now 
available, neither segregation can be considered valid. 
While Savi mentioned neither of the species published 
by Zuccarini, De Candolle places both as synonyms of 
P. vulgaris in the self-colored group. 

In 1836, Dr. C. A. Fingerhuth in the tenth volume 
of Linnaea in treating the " Economic Flora of the 
Lower and Middle Rhinelands," added to the list of 
species names. He used most of Savi's names and 
added several of his own, as he recognized 13 distinct 
species. These were assigned to three groups, viz., 
I, seeds compressed; II, seeds oblong; and III, seeds 
subrotund. This disposal apparently found little favor 
with either botanists or horticulturists as his names did 
not persist. 

The next investigation of note was that of George 
von Martens who, in 1860, published his monograph on 
Garden Beans. In 1869, a revised second edition was 



issued. Here he recognized 7 species and 120 varieties. 
Between the appearances of these two editions of 
Martens' work Dr. Friedrich Alefeld published his 
Landwirthschaftliche Flora (1886) and placed all the 
common beans under the single species Phaseolus 
vulgaris with 124 varieties. He stated that all varieties 
might be classified in three " variety groups " according 
to height of stem, as 1. P. vulgaris alius, 2. P. vulgaris 
medius, and 3. P. vulgaris nanus (P. nanus L.). 
However, he followed Martens' system and grouped 
them according to shape and color of seed into seven 
variety groups — each equivalent to one of Martens' 
species. 

The foregoing treatments represent the general 
trend towards a minute classification that extended over 
a century of botanical work, particularly in Germany, 
and Alefeld's work in reuniting the numerous varieties 
under a single species forecasts to some degree the 
broader conception of a species that later again found 
favor. It is worth noting that Ascherson and Graebner 
in their Mitteleuropaischen Flora in 1910 reduced the 
number of varieties to four with two sub-varieties of 
one of these. This tendency to reunite species and 
varieties is to be attributed in part to more thorough 
study of the genetic factors in plants and the realization 
that none of these numerous varieties is sufficiently 
constant to warrant a distinctive botanical name. 
Nearly all the variations as handled by the horticulturist 
or seedsman are kept fairly true to type by rigorous 
roguing and careful selection. Each horticultural variety 
in such a case is really an artifact and must be considered 
in a separate category from the natural botanical species. 

The lima bean. — Linneaus, as has been noted, 
described two forms of the lima bean as Phaseolus 
lunatus and P. inamoenus. The first name is the 
one accepted. The second name apparently applied 
to the so called " Speckled Lima." In 1770, Jacquin 
described another form as P. rufus. This is a red- 
seeded type often known as the Maritius bean. He also 
described at this time P. bipunctatus. This descrip- 
tion has puzzled many investigators, though nearly all 
have referred it to synonomy under P. lunatus. The 
ferruginous spots on each side of the hilum form a 
character rarely seen in the lima beans, though there is 
a specimen in the seed collection of the U. S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture that fits this description; and 
Jacquin's specimen in the British Museum is P. lunatus. 
In 1787, Medicus described P. achariensis. The 
writer has been unable to consult the original descrip- 
tion, but a specimen of Jacquin's so labeled in the 
British Museum is an undoubted lima of the sieva type. 

From time to time following this, various extreme 
forms were described as distinct species by several 
investigators, as follows: P. tunkinensis Louriero, 
1790; P. macrocarpus Moench, 1794, based on P. 
inamoenus L. ; P. Xuarezii Zuccarini, 1809 — appar- 
ently the first dwarf or bush type; P. saccharatus and 
P. parviRor US Stokes 1812; P. macrocarpus Poiret 
1813 (the identity of this bean with the lima is ques- 
tioned, but it seems very likely to be one of the big lima 



HISTORY OF AMERICAN GARDEN BEANS 



forms); P. derasus Schrank 1819, — a rather common 
blackseeded form from Brazil; and P. puberulus Hum- 
boldt, Borysland and Kunth 1823. 

In 1825, that portion of the Prodromus containing 
the Leguminosae was published and here De Candolle 
lists in the same group with the lima, but as distinct 
species, the following: P. inamoenus, P. tunkinensis, 
P. Xuaresii, P. macrocarpus Poir., P. derasus, and 
P. puberulus as well as P. adenanthus Meyer. The 
latter is undoubtedly a distinct species and is now 
widely distributed throughout the tropics. The others 
are almost certainly mere forms of P. lunatus. 

Roxburgh in 1832 added the name P. maximus to 
the already lengthy list of synonyms; and the year 1837 
marked a high water mark in the flood of names for 
this variable species. Blanco in his Philippine Flora 
described P. ilocanus and P. vexillatus, both of which 
are apparently lima beans; and Macfadyen in his 
Flora of Jamaica described P. dumosus, P. limensis, 
P. foecundus, P. saccharatus, and P. latisiliquus. 
Only the first of these is questionable and it seems more 
likely to be a form of the lima than of the kidney bean 
to which occasionally it has been doubtfully referred. 

Bentham in Martius, Flora Braziliensis in 1859 
attempted a segregation of small-podded and large- 
podded forms. He considered P. lunatus a small- 
podded form and placed P. bipunctatus as a synonym. 
The large-podded form he called P. lunatus var. 
macrocarpus and thought P. inamoenus, P. Xuaresii, 
P. puberulus, and P. saccharatus Macfadyen synonyms. 

Bailey in 1923 reviewed the situation in part and 
feeling that the large- and small-podded forms were 
distinct species used P. lunatus for the small-podded 
or so-called sieva forms, and P. limensis of Macfadyen 
for the large-podded or big lima types. A careful 
analysis of the characters proposed as distinguishing 
these forms has shown that they are invalid with the 
possible exception of the single one of pod shape. There 
seems to be as little reason for considering the two forms 
distinct as there would be in separating pencil-podded 
and fiat-podded types of the common bean; and, in 
fact, consistency in the treatment of the two groups 
would demand the recognition of part, if not all of 
Savi's segregates in the vulgaris group, if the extremes 
of the lima group were considered distinct. The wide 
variation and large number of intermediate forms of 
wild or semi-feral types argues very strongly against 
such a course. 

The runner bean. — Apparently the runner bean 
was the last of the three American beans to be intro- 
duced into Europe. Of the early writers — Gesner, 
Dodonaeus, Clusius, Lobel, and Bauhin — none men- 
tion this plant. In 1633, however, Thomas Johnson, 
on page 1215 of his History of Plants — an amended 
edition of Gerarde's Herball, says that the " Scarlet 
Beane " . . . " was procured by Mr. Tradescant 
and grows in our Gardens "... Thos. Martyn 
in his edition, 1807, of Miller's Gardener's Dictionary 
says: 

In Rays time (1686) it was cultivated rather 



for the beauty and durability of the flowers than 
for the fruit; and ladies did not then disdain to put 
the flowers in their nosegays and garlands. Mr. 
Miller seems to have been the first who brought it 
into much repute as an esculent Kidney -bean; and 
I well remember his speaking much in praise of it 
more than fifty years since, and that he preferred it 
at his own table. 

Two years later, the scarlet runner is again described by Cor- 
nut in his Canadensium Plantarum . . . Historia. 
According to E. Meyer's republication (in the tenth 
volume of Linnaea) of Titius' catalog, it was first noted 
in Germany in 1654 and three varieties were noted, viz. 
the black-seeded red-flowered; the variegated-seeded 
red-flowered; and the white-seeded, white-flowered. 
Morison mentioned the red-flowered form in 1680, as 
did Tournefort in 1719. This form is the only one noted 
in Kniphof's Centuria (1747) and in Linnaeus' 
Hortus Upsalensis (1748). Again, in 1753, in the 
Species Plantarum it is the scarlet blossom that gives 
the valid name to the plant, Phaseolus coccineus. 
One wonders why Linnaeus in the second edition of the 
Species Plantarum in 1763 refers his plant to varietal 
rank under P. vulgaris. Lamarck in his Encyclopedia 
(vol. 3 p. 70), possibly feeling that the name was inade- 
quate, called the runner bean P. multiflorus and noted 
that white-flowered, white-seeded forms occurred. Will- 
denow in his edition of the Species Plantarum adopted 
Lamarck's treatment; and has been credited very gen- 
erally and quite as erroneously with having originated 
this name. De Candolle in the Prodromus (1825) 
held P. multiflorus as a composite species with two 
varieties coccineus and albiflorus. 

Martens in his Gartenbohnen made four varieties, 
viz., niger, a black-seeded form; albus, the earlier 
albiflorus renamed; coccineus, the best known form; 
and bicolor based on Phaseolus bicolor of Velloso's 
Flora Fluminensis 1825. This is the " Painted 
Lady " of the modern catalog. Martens attributes 
the species to Dom Antonio da Arrabida. 

Alefeld in his Landwirthschaftliche Flora (1866) 
made a new genus, Lipusa, for the runner bean because 
of the facts that the cotyledons stay in the ground as in 
the Viceae and the position of the stigma seemed dif- 
ferent than in other Phaseolae. But one more change 
in status was made before botanists returned this bean to 
its original status with its earliest name, Phaseolus 
coccineus of Linnaeus. This change was made by 
Nicholson in his Dictionary of Gardening, vol. 3, 
p. 94 in 1886, when he called the plant P. vulgaris var. 
multiflorus. 

Horticultural varieties. — We may consider the 
horticultural history of the beans as opposed to the 
botanical history in that the former deals with garden 
forms or horticultural varieties generally named in the 
vernacular and representing types selected with special 
emphasis on characteristics of value in their garden 
culture or culinary usage. Here earliness or lateness of 
bearing, type of pod, color of seed, and size and form of 
vine, pod, and seed are of importance. It is patent to 
everyone that these differences as discovered and held 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



by selection and care of individual plants and their 
progeny would result in groups of plants of uncertain 
stability. It is nearly impossible to determine now 
just exactly what kind of plant was meant by the short 
descriptions and poor illustrations of old horticultural 
lists, and the likelihood of determining where in our 
present scheme of classification these old varieties would 
fall is almost nil — beyond the roughest sort of approxi- 
mation. Consequently, no attempt is made here to 
consider horticultural varieties before seedsmen began 
to list them for sale. Before this the varieties had 
been passed from hand to hand, exchanged in trade, 
or otherwise bandied about. 

Landreth in 1784 seems to have been America's 
oldest seedhouse, but many of their early records were 
lost by fire. Thorburn is noted by several writers as 
having listed a number of varieties in 1822. Many of 
these are of fairly certain types and are given here. 

Both Large White and Small White limas are 
listed and undoubtedly represent selections of wild 
types or at least types cultivated by the Indians and 
acquired by the early settlers. The bush types came 
into the trade much later — probably not before 1870- 
1875. The speckled lima was well known abroad and 
had been cultivated in the south in colonial times. 

Several types of field beans are noted, among which 
are White Marrow, Yellow Cranberry, China Red Eye, 
and White Kidney. At that time or within the next 
decade or two Yellow Eye and Turtle Soup were cat- 
aloged. Without question some of these varieties as 
known today are improved strains of those sold at that 
time, but the types were apparently fairly true. 

Green pole beans were represented by Dutch Case- 
knife and White Cranberry Pole (Lazy Wife), both of 
which had undoubtedly been grown by farmers for many 
years. Red Cranberry Pole evidently was in cultiva- 
tion here in the early 1800's and London Horticultural 
is said to have been imported from England in 1825. 

Of the green-podded bush types, Long Yellow Six 
Weeks, Early Yellow Six Weeks, Refugee, and Mohawk 
w : ere in cultivation among the first and were noted by 
Thorburn in his early catalogs. Mohawk is said to 
have been cultivated earlier than 1800 by the Indians. 
Dwarf Red Cranberry of the same type as Low's 
Champion was also well known. 

In the Magazine of Horticulture for 1837 Valen- 
tine is noted as a novelty and is one of the first flat- 
podded beans listed. It was said to have originated 
near Philadelphia some time before this but apparently 
was not generally distributed until somewhat later. 

About 1835 Cutshort (Corn or Cornhill) appeared 
in the catalogs and within the next two years the first 
cultivated wax pole is noted in England as Algiers 
though it did not find its way into American trade 
until about 1852 when this variety was introduced as 
Indian Chief. 

The earliest Dwarf Horticultural is said to have 
been in cultivation before 1845 though present varieties 
are rather different types from those passing under this 
name before the Civil War. 



The following list cataloged by Horey in 1859 shows 
the status of bean varieties in the middle of the nine- 
teenth century: Early Round and Early Long Yellow 
Sue Weeks, White's Extra Early, Early Mohawk, 
Early China, Early Valentine, Dwarf Horticultural, 
Refugee, White Marrow, Large White Kidney, 
Half Moon, Turtle Soup, Early White Caseknife, 
Horticultural Pole, Red Cranberry, Sieva, Large 
Lima, Scarlet Runner, White Dutch Runner, and 
Painted Lady Runner. 

Within the next 20 years several new varieties 
appeared, among which the most notable are German 
Black Wax — probably the first wax-podded bush type 
in the trade — Golden Wax, Concord, a horticultural 
pole selection, Dreer's Improved Lima, and Henderson's 
Bush Lima. The latter, though reported to have been 
discovered along a roadside in Virginia about 1875, 
apparently did not get in the trade until 1888. 

Selection of promising chance hybrids or sports was 
apparently the chief source of new varieties in America 
at this time and indeed for many years later. C. N. 
Keeney of Leroy, N. Y., who possibly has to his credit 
as many valuable varieties as any other single grower, 
is quoted as saying "It is a curious fact that most new 
varieties of beans are accidents rather than the result of 
hand pollination. Nature by using bees seems to do a 
better job of it than man." Keeney started his selec- 
tions about 1885 and claims, among others, origination 
of the following better known varieties: Pencil Pod 
Black Wax, Brittle Wax, Fordhook Favorite, 
Keeney's Rustless Golden Wax, Wardwell's Kidney 
Wax, Giant Stringless Green Pod, Surecrop String- 
less Wax, Burpee's Stringless White Wax, and 
Burpee's Stringless Green Pod. 

A. N. Jones, also of LeRoy, N. Y., later of Newark, 
N. Y., produced a larger number of hybrids beginning 
in 1881 with Jones Ivory Pod Wax, a parent of many 
later varieties. 

D. G. Burlingame of Genesee Co., N. Y., with 
Bountiful, John Kramer of Doylestown, Pa., with 
Golden Cluster Wax, and W. H. Grenell of Pierrepont 
Manor, N. Y., with Grenells Rustless, have selected 
or originated the varieties listed. Unfortunately, the 
originators of many varieties are unknown. 

Until very lately definitely planned crosses based on 
studies of the heredity of characters in beans have played 
so small a part in the development of new varieties 
that one can not wonder that the discoverer of chance 
seedlings should have been so quickly forgotten. More- 
over, the original discoverer was almost without excep- 
tion not engaged in the seed business, and he lost both 
control and interest in the variety as soon as he sold his 
stock to a large seed company. The commercial con- 
cern also lost interest in the introducer as soon as the 
purchase was completed. The relation of the Burpee 
Company and Keeney forms a noteworthy exception. 

In summarizing, it should be said that with few 
exceptions all beans coming into the trade during the 
nineteenth century were types already grown by the 
Indians and the colonists and were picked up by the 



HISTORY OF AMERICAN GARDEN BEANS 



seedsmen from various local sources. Even the more 
noteworthy selections of the latter part of the century 
originated from these early local types. 

From just before the beginning of the twentieth 
century importations of varieties originating in Europe 
(especially through the large seed establishments of 
Sutton in England and Vilmorin in France) became 
numerous in American catalogs. Most of these have 
disappeared because the American custom of using 
beans at a more mature stage than the Europeans do 



has prevented the acceptance of varieties which show 
stringiness or parchment in the fully formed pods. 

Forcing types which were fairly abundant in catalogs 
of the earlier decades of this period have been rendered 
unnecessary by the opening up of the large vegetable 
crop areas of Florida, Texas, and other southern states. 

The present tendency is the introduction of strains 
of fully known parentage. 

The history of individual varieties is treated in 
considerable detail in Chapter III. 



CHAPTER II 
SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF BEANS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



The beans and their allies as treated in this part of 
THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK form a closely 
related group of plants known as the tribe Phascoleae. 
This group of plants is closely allied to the vetches 
described in Part I, but differs from them chiefly in 
their pinnate stipulate leaves without tendrils or setae 
and in the small disc at the base of the pistils. They are 
nearly all twining, annual or perennial herbs, though a 
few are woody and several are not twining. 

The tribe contains about 60 genera and over 1,000 
species of plants of which only those of commercial 
importance are discussed. The following chapter, in 
fact, deals only with certain species of Phaseolus. Other 
species of this genus, as well as those of several other 
genera of the tribe, are of sufficient importance to merit 
some consideration here. Besides those plants more 
fully described below, the following deserve brief 
mention: Amphlcarpa monoica Ell., the "Hog 
Peanut " of the eastern United States, is said to have 
been cultivated in the South for its pods (Sturtevant's 
Notes on Edible Plants 47. 1919.), Apios tuberosa 
Moench, the " Ground Nut " of northeastern North 
America, has edible tubers and is often grown as an 
ornamental vine. Voandzeia subterranea Thouars, 
the " African Peanut," is grown for its edible seeds. 
Pachyrhizus tuberosus Spreng, the " Yam Bean," 
has edible pods and roots. Psophocarpus tetra- 
gonolobus DC, the " Goa Bean," is used in the Old 
World tropics for its edible seeds and pods. Sturtevant 
notes that the seeds of certain species of Clitoria, 
Mucuna, and Rhynchosia are used for food, as are 
the roots of species of Flemingia and Pueraria and 
the leaves of Erythrina indica (Notes on Edible 
Plants. 1919). 

Tribe: PHASEOLEAE Bronn, D/ss. Legum. 133. 
1822. 

KEY TO IMPORTANT GENERA 
A. Style not hairy, except sometimes at the base, 
b. The 10th stamen ithe upper one, opposite to the standard) 
at least partly united with the others, plants herbaceous, 
c. Flowers small, not much exceeding the calyx. 

1. Soja (p. 8' 
cc. Flowers large, much longer than the calyx. 

2. Canavalia (p. 8 I 
bb. The 10th stamen free, plant somewhat shrubby. 

3. Cajamis p. 9) 
AA. Style hairy. 

b. Keel merely curved 

c. Stigma not oblique 4. Dolichos (p. 9) 

cc. Stigma very oblique 5. Vigiia i p. 10 

bb. Keel spirally coiled 6. Phaseolus p. 1 1 

1. SOJA Moench, Meth. 153. 1794. 
The only species is the following: Soja max 
Piper, Jour. Am. Soc. Agron. 6:84. 1914. Soy- 
bean. — Phaseolus maxL. Sp. PL 725. 1753. Dolichos 



Soja L. Sp. PI. 727. 1753. Soja hispida Moench, 
Meth. 153. 1794. Phaseolus sordidus Salisb. Prod. 
335. 1796. Glycine Soja Sieb. & Zucc. Abh. Akad. 
Moench. 4?: 119. 1845. Glycine hispida Maxim. 
Bull. Acad. Sci. Petersb. 18:398. 1873. Soja Soja 
Karst. Pharm. Med. Bot. 711. 1882. Glycine max 
Merr. Int. Rumph. Herb. Amb. 274. 1917. 

Annual herb, stout, bushy, and erect in most of the cultivated 
forms, but occasionally slender with twining tips — the wild form 
a slender twining vine — hairy throughout with tawny or gray 
pubescence, 1-3 m tall; leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets entirely ovate, 
obtuse, mucronate, the lateral oblique, hairy along the veins and 
margins; flowers small, white or purplish in short axillary racemes; 
calyx hairy, the upper teeth more or less united; standard broad, 
slightly auriculate; wings lightly adherent to the short obtuse keel; 
stamens monadelphous, the 10th partially free; pods short stalked, 
5-8 cm long, constricted between the seeds; seeds 2-3 I sometimes 4) 
globose to oblong, yellow, green, brown, or black, with the small 
hilum often of different color than the body of the seed. Chromo- 
some No. 10 and 20. l Native to eastern Asia. 

Soybeans, according to Bretschneider, were culti- 
vated in China as early as 2800 B. C. They can he 
grown wherever corn is grown, hence New York can 
probably grow many varieties to advantage. Morse 
(Soy Beans, U. S. D. A. Farmer's Bulletin 1520. 
1927) says that " increased utilization of the soybean in 
the United States has resulted in an enormous increase 
in acreage for hay, pasturage, silage, and seed." It is 
estimated that 500,000 acres were grown in the United 
States in 1917. The acreage had increased to over 
3,000,000 by 1927 of which over 1 3 is used for the 
production of seed. Wiggans (Varietal Experiments 
with Soybeans in New York, Cornell Bulletin 491. 
1929) recommends the following varieties: For all 
purposes, Black Eyebrow, Minsoy; for seed, Black 
Eyebrow, Minsoy, Ito San; for hay, Wilson, Dun- 
field, Hamilton, Black Eyebrow, Minsoy; for silage. 
Hamilton, Dunfield, Midwest, Black Eyebrow, 
Minsoy. 

It would seem that a sufficient number of varieties 
tested out in various sections of the State might revise 
this list considerably and show some sections of the 
State well adapted for soybean production. 

2. CANAVALIA Adans. Fam. PI. 2:325. 1763. 
(Here spelled Canavali; properly latinized by De 
Candolle in DC. Prod. 2:403. 1825.) — Clementea 
Cav. Anal. Cienc. Nat. 7:63. 1804. Malocchia 
Savi, Nuovo Giorn. Pisa 8: 113. 1824. Wenderothia 
Schlecht. Linnaea 12:330. 1838. Cryptophaseolus 
O. Kuntze, Rev. Gen. 1:176. 1891. 

Twining or erect herbs or shrubs: leaves 3-foliolate: stipules 
thin caducous; flowers numerous in axillary raceme-like thyrses: 
bracts and bracteoles caducous; calyx bilabiate, the upper lip 
large, 2-lobed, the lower much smaller, simple or I in the following 
species among others ) 3-lobed; standard large, reflexed, auriculate; 
wings free, narrow, auncled; keel curved, the petals partly united; 



1 The haploid number of chromosomes is given, based on the lists by Tischler, Tabulae Biologicae 4:34. 1926, and by L O. 
Gaiser, Genetica 6 and 12, 1930. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF BEANS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



stamens generally monadelphous, the 10th partly (rarely entirely) 
free; style glabrous; stigma capitate; pods stipitate, oblong or 
linear, straight or somewhat falcate, ridged near the sutures; seeds 
globose or ellipsoid, the hilum linear. 

About 40 species are known from the tropics and 
sub-tropics. About two dozen are native to America. 
Several species are reported to have poisonous seeds. 
Only two are important as cultivated plants. These 
are used for food, forage, green manure, etc. 

KEY TO CULTIVATED SPECIES OF CANAVALIA 
Pod more than 10 times as long as broad; hilum half as long as 

seed; plant usually bushy 1. C. ertsiformis 

Pod less than 8 times as long as broad; hilum nearly as long as seed; 

plant climbing 2. C. gladiata 

1. Canavalia ensiformis DC. Prod. 2:404. 1825. 
Jack Bean. — Dolichos ensiformis L. Sp. PI. 725. 
1753. Dolichos acinaciformis Jacq. Coll. Bot. 1:114. 
1786. Dolichos pugioniformis Gmel. Syst. Nat. ed. 
13. 2:1105. 1796. Malocchia ensiformis Savi, Nu- 
ovo Giorn. Pisa. 10:21. 1825. 

Bushy erect annual, sometimes twining when growing in 
shade; stems stout, terete, somewhat reflexed, strigillose; petioles 
usually longer than leaflets; stipules fugaceous; leaflets oval to 
ovate, 6-12 cm long; flowers rose or light magenta; pods linear 
slightly curved, beaked at tip, scarcely compressed, 2S-30 cm long, 
2-2.5 cm wide, 12-20-seeded; seeds ellipsoid, compressed, shiny 
white, the hilum half as long as seed. Native to Tropical America. 

The jack bean is widespread in the tropics of both 
hemispheres and is cultivated to a small extent in the 
southeastern United States, but other species of beans 
seem more profitable for the various uses to which it 
is put and it seems likely to be useful only under special 
conditions. A thorough discussion of this bean is 
given by C. V. Piper in " The Jack Bean." (U. S. D. A. 
Circular 92. 1920.) 

2. Canavalia gladiata DC. Prod. 2:404. 1825. 
Sword Bean. — Dolichos gladiatus Jacq. Coll. Bot. 
2:276. 1788. Canavalia maxima Thou. Journ. Bot. 
Desv. 1:78. 1813. Malocchia gladiata Savi, Nuovo 
Giorn. Pisa 10:24. 1825. 

Annual ipossibly perennial in the tropics) climbing vine; 
stems green, reflexed strigillose becoming glabrate with age; petioles 
shorter than leaflets; stipules fugaceous; leaflets broadly ovate; 
flowers pale pink or pink tinged; pods linear compressed, slightly 
curved, 20-35 cm long, 3.5-5 cm broad, 8-16-seeded; seeds ellipsoid, 
more compressed than those of C. ensiformis, the hilum nearly 
as long as the seed, red or ochraceous, rarely white. Known only 
from cultivated plants and possibly derived from C. virosa (Roxb.) 
Wight & Am., a native of India. There are several distinct varieties 
cultivated in India, Burma, China, Japan, and the southeastern 
United States. The seeds are said to be very palatable. 

The American species of Canavalia are treated by 
Piper in the Contributions of the U. S. National 
Herbarium. 20:555-576, 1925, and the Old World 
Species were revised by Piper & Dunn in Kew Bulle- 
tin Misc. Inf. 129-145. 1922. 

3. CAJANUS Adans. Fam. 2:326. 1763. (Here 
spelled Cajan and properly latinized by De Candolle 



in Horr. Bot. Monsp. 85. 1813.) — Cajanum Raf. 
Sylva Tellur. 25. 1838. 

Erect shrubs with stout tap root and numerous lateral nodule- 
bearing, rootlets; branches angular, furrowed; leaflets 3, entire 
lanceolate; petioles shorter than the leaflets; stipules deltoid subu- 
late, fugaceous; flowers in axillary racemes toward the tips of the 
branches; calyx with 2 upper lobes united; standard broad, auricled; 
keel blunt; stamens diadelphous (9 and 1); pod flattish, somewhat 
constricted between the seeds; seeds usually 3, 4, or 5. 

Perhaps two or three species of which the only one 
well known is the following: 

Cajanus cajan Millsp. Field Columb. Mus. Bot. 
2:53. 1900. Pigeon Pea.— Cytisus cajan L. Sp. PI. 
739. 1753. Cajan inodorum Medic. Vorl. Ch. 
Phys. Geo. 2:363. 1787. Cajanus flavus DC. Car. 
Hort. Bot. Monsp. 86. 1813. Cajanus indicus 
Spreng. Syst. 3:248. 1826. Cajanum thora Raf. 
Sylva Tellur. 25. 1838. Cajan cajan Huth, Helios 
11:133. 1893. 

Erect bushy shrub; branches finely pubescent; leaflets acute, 
3-10 cm long, 2.5-3.5 cm wide, grayish tomentose underneath; 
stipules deltoid subulate; calyx pubescent, the lobes acute; standard 
orbicular, indexed at the basal auricles; wings obliquely obovate; 
style slender thickened in the middle; stigma capitate, oblique; 
pod 5-8 cm. long, linear, straight or curved, beaked. Probably 
native to tropical Africa but cultivated and run wild throughout 
the tropics and subtropics. 

Sturtevant (Notes on Edible Plants 124. 1919) 
says " It is certainly one of the oldest cultivated plants 
in the world . . . Schweinfurth states that it is 
found in Egyptian tombs of the twelfth dynasty (2200- 
2400 B.C.)." 

The typical form apparently is a pure yellow flowered plant 
with rather small red seeds. Krauss | The Pigeon Pea. Hawaii 
Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 46. 6. 1921.) says that " it is early 
maturing and very heavy seeding, yielding a heavy crop of seeds 
within 7 or 8 months from time of planting but attaining in the 
second year a height of only 3 to 7 feet." The following seems to 
be a well marked form. 

C. cajan forma 1 bicolor Van Es. comb. nov. — C. bicolor DC 
Cat. Hort. Bot. Monsp. 85. 1813. C. striatus Boj. Hort. 
Maurit. 109. 1837. C. lutens Bello. Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. 
Nat. 10:260. 1881. 

This form has yellow flowers tinged with red, and light grey, 
faintly speckled seeds somewhat larger than those of the species. 
Krauss (I.e.) states that it "does not begin to yield its maximum 
crop until the second year, — and attains a height of from 6 to 
10 feet." 

There are apparently several strains of each form in 
cultivation. The seeds are eaten like peas and are said 
to be equally palatable; the leaves furnish excellent 
forage; and the plants are very valuable for enriching 
the soil. 

4. DOLICHOS L. Sp. PI. 725. 1753.— La blab 
Adans. Fam. 2:325. 1763 (Latinized as Lablavia D. 
Don, in Sweet, Brit. Fl. Gard. II. 3:236. 1834). 
Dipogon Leibm. Ann. Sci. Nat. IV. 2:374. 1854. 

Twining, trailing or suberect herbs and subshrubs; leaves 
3-foliolate, stipellate, the stipules small; flowers axillary, solitary 
or in close racemes, white, yellow, reddish, or purple; calyx lobes 



1 In the treatment of subdivisions of species in this work the terms subspecies and forma are used entirely throughout the botanical 
section. The term variety is here used only in the horticultural sense except in the citation of synonyms where such a course is 
impossible. It is felt that much confusion will be thus avoided. 



10 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



short, united: standard orbicular, auriculate: wings obovate; keel 
sharply curved; stamens diadelphous; pod large, flat, beaked; seeds 
globose or compressed. 

There are 60 to 70 species of which only one, the 
bonavist bean, is cultivated in the United States. This 
is sometimes held as belonging in a separate genus, 
Lablab or Lablavia. 

Dolichos Lablab L. Sp. PL 725. 1753. Bona- 
vist Bean. — Dolichos purpureus L. Sp. PI. ed. 
2. 1021. 1763. Dolichos benghalensis Jacq. Hort. 
Vindob. 2:57. 1772. Lablab ferrugineus Medic. 
Vorl. Ch. Phys. 2:354. 1787. Lablab niger Medic. 
1. c. Lablab rufus Medic, l.c . Lablab benghal- 
ensis Medic. Phil. Bot. 1:205. 1789. Dol- 
ichos martinicensis Jacq. ex Medic. 1. c. Dolichos 
albus Lour. Fl. Cochinch. 2:439. 1790. Dolichos 
cultratus Thunb. Trans. Linn. Soc. 2:340. 1794. 
Dolichos amoenus Salisb. Prod. 334. 1796. Dolichos 
tetraspermus Willd. Sp. PI. 3:1044. 1800. Lablab 
vulgaris Savi, Nuovo Giorn. Pisa 8:116. 1824. 
Lablab nankinicus Savi, 1. c. 119. Lablab leuco- 
carpus Savi, 1. c. 120. Lablab cultratus DC. Prod. 
2:402. 1825. Lablab perennans DC. 1. c. Lablab 
purpureus Sweet, Hort. Brit. 481. 1827. Lablavia 
vulgaris D. Don, in Sweet, Brit. Fl. Gard. II. 3:t.236. 
1835. 

It is an open question as to whether the following 
apply to this species or to closely allied forms. 

Dolichos lignosus L. Sp. PL 726. 1753.— 
Dolichos curtissii G. Don. Gen. Syst. 2:357. 1832. 

Annual or perennial i in Tropics' usually viny, climbing from 
5 to 30 feet or occasionally bushy; pubescent with short white 
hairs, or nearly glabrous; leaflets broadly ovate, 7.5 to 15 cm long, 
abruptly acute; flowers racemose or paniculate, 10 to 30 in each 
inflorescence, purplish or white, variable in size; pods green, white, 
purple or purple-margined, fibrous or fleshy, flattened, 4.5 cm to 
12 cm long, 1.5 to 3.5 cm wide; seeds nearly globular to compressed 
ovoid, varying greatly in color, the hilum and raphe prominent. 
Chromosome No. 11 or 12. 

A number of forms have been described but need 
further study. Among these should be noted those 
published by Alefeld in his Landwirtschaftliche 
Flora, p. 27 as Lablab vulgaris var. alba, var. rubra, 
var. pumila, and var. poecila. A purple-flowered 
form, the hyacinth bean, is cultivated as an ornamental 
vine. Numerous forms are cultivated especially in the 
tropics and sub-tropics. The pods are used as " snap 
beans," the seeds of some forms are dried, and the plant 
has had some use for forage and as a green manure. 
Piper and Morse describe a number of forms in " The 
Bonavist, Lablab, or Hyacinth Bean, (U. S. D. A. 
B. P. I. Bulletin 318. 1915.) 

5. VIGW Savi, Nuovo Giorn. Pisa 10:27. 
1825. — Plectropis Schum. & Thonn. Beskr. Guin. PI. 
338. 1827. Callicysthus Endl. Prod. Fl. Norf. 90. 
1833. Scytalis E. Mey. Comm. PI. Afr. Austr. 144. 
1835. Strophostyles E. Mey. 1. c. 147. Liebrechtsia 
De Wild. Ann. Mus. Congo. Bot. IV. 1?:70. 1902. 

Twining or erect herbs or subshrubs; leaves 3-foliolate, 
stipulate; flowers usually few, somewhat capitate, often in alternate 
pairs at the end of long peduncles, white yellowish, pink, reddish, 
or purplish; standard orbicular, auriculate, callous-ridged within: 
wings obovate or rhomboid; keel incurved; stamens diadelphous 



(9 & 1); ovary sessile; ovules numerous; style bearded inside; 
stigma oblique, incurved; pods nearly terete, linear: seeds nearly 
globular to elongate reniform, small. Chromsome No. 11 or 12 
Native to the Tropics and sub-tropics. 

About 60 species are known. Vigna forms a con- 
necting link between Dolichos and Phaseolus. It 
differs from the former in having a lateral rather than a 
terminal stigma and from the latter in having a curved 
rather than twisted or coiled keel. The important culti- 
vated species is the cowpea, with its variant forms, the 
catjang and the asparagus bean. They are differentiated 
as follows: 

Pods 8 to 30 cm long, not flabby or inflated; seeds little broader than 
thick. 

Seeds 6 to 9 mm long, pods pendent 1. V. sinensis. 

Seeds 5 to 6 mm long, pods erect or somewhat deflexed. 

2. V. sinensis subsp. cylindrica. 

Pods 30 to 90 cm long, fleshy, becoming flabby and inflated: seeds 

elongate reniform, 8-12 mm long, much broader than thick. 

3. V. sinensis subsp. sesquipedalis. 

1. Vigna sinensis Savi ex Hassk. Car. PL Hort. 
Bot. Bog. 279. 1844. Cowpea.— Dolichos sinensis 
Tomer in L. Cent. PL 2:28. 1756. (Amoen. Acad. 
1:326. 1759.) Phaseolus sphaerospermus L. Sp. PL 
ed. 2. 1018. 1763. Dolichos monachalis Brot. Fl. 
Lusit. 2:125. 1804. Dolichos melanophthalmus 
DC. Prod. 2:400. 1825. Dolichos oleraceus Schum. 
& Thonn. Beskr. Guin. PL 340. 1827. Dolichos bicon- 
tortus Duri, Act. Linn. Soc. Bord. 27:liii. 1869. 

Annual prostrate, procumbent, bushy, or erect plants often 
twining at the tips; stems and leaves pale green to purplish; flowers 
white or violet; pods more or less torulose or occasionally terete, 
curved or falcate, rarely straight or coiled, 20 to 30 cm long; pendent, 
not at all flabby or inflated when green; seeds 6 to 9 mm long, 
sub-uniform to sub-globose. Native to Central Africa. 

The cowpea has been in cultivation since very early 
times. According to Morse (Cowpeas: Culture and 
Varieties, U. S. D. A. Farmer's Bulletin No. 1148. 
3. 1920.), the Phaseolus of the old Roman writers was 
the cowpea. He states further that " in Italy the 
Blackeye cowpea is still called by the same name as the 
Kidney bean, namely ' fagiolo ' which is the Italian 
equivalent of Phaseolus." Romans, in 1775, seems to 
be the first writer to mention the cowpea in the United 
States, although there is evidence that it was introduced 
in the West Indies by the early Spanish landholders and 
that it was grown in North Carolina as early as 1714. 
Morse (7. c.) lists about 20 varieties or groups of varieties 
including the catjang and asparagus bean^ as being 
grown in this country at present. Piper (Agricultural 
Varieties of the Cowpea and Immediately Related 
Species U. S. D. A. B. P. I. Bulletin 229. 1-160. 1912.) 
describes 220 cowpeas, 50 catjangs, and 35 asparagus 
beans. He also gives a full treatment of the botanical 
history of this group. Reference should also be given 
here to another paper by Piper (The Wild Prototype 
of the Cowpea. U. S. D. A. B. P. I. Circ. 124. 
pp. 29-32. 1913.) and to one by Wight (The History 
of the Cowpea and its Introduction into America 
U. S. D. A. B. P. I. Bulletin 201. pp. 43 59. 1907.) 
Cowpeas are chiefly valuable in the cotton belt. 
They form the most widely grown leguminous crop in 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF BEANS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



11 



the South, and though grown largely for forage and green 
manure, the seeds of most varieties are used for food and 
furnish an excellent vegetable. They are grown to a 
slight extent in the warmer parts of New York and 
probably could be grown to a greater extent with profit. 
For table use the Blackeye and White are considered 
the best varieties. A form of Blackeye known as 
Extra Early Blackeye is best adapted to this State. 
Both Blackeye and White are group names rather than 
strict variety names, the first name applying to all forms 
with white seeds having a black eye and the second to 
those with creamy white seeds self colored or with a 
greenish eye. The varieties forming these groups can 
scarcely be distinguished. Though there seem to be 
some differences in time of ripening, resistance to 
disease, etc., the appearance of all is practically identical 
within the groups. The catjang and asparagus bean 
groups are more easily distinguished and undoubtedly 
merit the subspecific rank here assigned them, but 
extensive field tests with large numbers of types have 
shown that they can scarcely be considered to merit 
specific rank. It is quite possible that one or two other 
types merit subspecific rank with the following forms, 
but they have not been grown sufficiently long nor 
widely enough to determine the constancy of their 
characters. 

2. Vigna sinensis subsp. cylindrica Van Es. comb. nov. 
Catjang. — Phaseolus cylindricus Stickm. Herb. Amb. in L. 
Amoen. Acad. 4:132. 1759. Dolichos catjang. L. Manr. 2:269. 
1771. Dolichos lubia Forsk. Fl. Aegypt.-Arab. 133. 1775. 
Dolichos transquebaricus Jacq. Hort. Vindob. 3:39. 1776. 
Vigna catjang Walpers, Linnaea 73:533. 1839. Vigna 
cylindrica Skeels, U. S. D. A. Bur. PI. Ind. Bui. 282. 32. 1913. 

Usually erect or semi-bushy annuals but occasionally trailing; 
resembling the preceding in foliage and flower characters but dif- 
fering in fruit and seed; pods small 7.5 to 12.5 cm long, erect when 
green and usually remaining so when dry or becoming spreading 
or deflexed at maturity. Under American conditions the best 
varieties are very late and not prolific. 

3. Vigna sinensis subsp. sesquipedalis Van Es. comb. nov. 
Asparagus bean. — V. sinensis var. sesquipedalis Koern. ex 
Asch. & Schw. ///. Fl. Egypt, in Mem. Inst. Egypt 2:69. 1889. 
Dolichos sesquipedalis L. Sp. PI. ed. 2. 1019. 1763. Vigna 
sesquipedalis Fruwirth, Anbau Hulsenfr. 254. 1898. 

Trailing, glabrous or glabrate annual vine; leaflets rhomboid; 
flowers nearly white to violet purple, 2 to 2.5 cm long; calyx lobes 
acuminate; pods pendent 30 to 90 cm long, fleshy and brittle, 
becoming flabby and somewhat inflated, shrinking about the seeds 
when dry; seeds elongate reniform, 8 to 12 mm long, widely separate, 
color pure buff, clay, blackish violet, maroon, white yellowish or 
pinkish, or marbled, spotted or speckled. 

The Asparagus bean forms an excellent table bean or 
" snap bean " and certain varieties merit wider culture. 
They are not equal to the better varieties of cowpeas 
for seed production and forage. 

6. PHASEOLUS L. Sp. PI. 723. 1753.— 
Cadelium Medic. Vorl. Ch. Ges. 2:352. 1787. 
Phasellus Medic. 1. c. Caracalla Tod. Index Sem. 
Hort. Panorm. (1861;. 32. 1862. Lipusa Alef. 
Landw. FL 26. 1866. 

Mostly herbaceous vines, twining counterclockwise, but 
occasionally woody and sometimes erect and bushy; pubescence 
variable: leaves generally long stalked, stipules persistent; leaflets 3, 
occasionally reduced to 1, entire, variable in shape; stipellate, 



nyctitropic by means of swollen articulations at the base of the 
pedicels; flowers (see fig. 1) yellow, white, red or purplish, axillary 
in few flowered racemes or spikes; peduncles usually with pedicel- 
late glands; bracteoles (fig. l.b) always present; calyx (fig. I.e.) 
5 lobed, the upper two lobes often connate; standard (fig. l.s.) 
usually more or less orbicular and emarginate; wings (fig. l.a 1 & a-) 
oblong to obovate; keel (fig. l.k) coiled in one or more close turns 
(except in $ Sigmoidotropis where it is curled loosely like the 
letter S): stamens ifig. l.f.) diadelphous, 9 and 1; pistils (fig. l.pj 
on a short cup shaped disk; the style coiled with the keels bearded 
within, the stigma oblique or lateral; pods terete or more or less 
flattened, straight or falcate; seeds few to many, nearly globular to 
reniform, germination epigeal or hypogeal. Chromosome No. 11 
(in the species counted thus far). 




Fig. 1. A flower of the lima bean, King of the Garden, 'side 
view above, and dissected to show parts below) b— bracteole. c-calyx. 
a 1 and a— wings or alae. s-standard. k-keel (k'-with essential organs 
included; k--keel alone), f-stamens, showing filament tube and free 
stamen, p-pistil. 

About 100 species in warmer parts of America and 
perhaps one-third as many in like regions of the Old 
World. Of these, many are undoubtedly of local 
importance for food, but only nine are widely cultivated. 
Three American species, the common bean, the runner 
bean, and the lima bean are of almost world-wide im- 
portance, and the fourth, the tepary bean, is of consider- 
able importance for hot semi-arid regions. These 
species are treated in more or less detail in the following 
chapter. The other five are Oriental beans of second- 
ary importance as yet and are treated briefly following 
the technical description of each species. 

KEY TO IMPORTANT SPECIES OF PHASEOLUS 
Flowers yellow; left keel petal spurred; oriental annuals. 

Leaflets with 3 to 5 narrow deeply cut lobes. . 1. P. aconitifolius 
Leaflets entire or shallowly lobed. 

Plants and pods very hairy; seeds mostly dull; germination 
epigeal. 
Branches spreading or procumbent; pods long hairy; seeds 
oblong, testa not striate, hilum concave. 2. P. mungo 



12 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Branches erect or ascending; pods short hairy; seeds globose 
or nearly so; testa crenulate-striate, hilum not concave. 

3. I*. aureus 
Plants and pods glabrate or lightly pubescent; seeds smooth 
and shiny; germination hypogeal. 
Racemes 10 to 20 flowered; pods not constricted between 

the seeds; hilum concave 4. P. calcaratus 

Racemes 6 to 12 flowered; pods constricted between the 

seeds; hilum not concave 5. P. annularis 

Flowers white, creamy, red or purplish; left keel petal not spurred; 
American annuals and perennials. 
Roots tuberous or much thickened; flowers numerous, large, 
showy, scarlet or white on long naked peduncles; germination 

hypogeal 6. P. coccineus 

Roots fibrous; flowers smaller, white creamy, or purplish, (the 

larger types few on short peduncles), germination epigeal. 

Seed without conspicuous radiating lines, nearly circular in 

cross section; flowers 8 to 20 mm long, on short peduncles. 

Bracts small, deciduous; pods generally less than 8 cm long. 

7. P. acutifolius 
Bracts large, persistent, about the length of the calyx; pod 

generally over 10 cm long 8. P. vulgaris 

Seed with conspicuous lines radiating from the hilum, flattened 
elliptic in cross section; flowers 6 mm or less long, on long 
peduncles 9. P. lunatus 

1. Phascolus acontifolius Jacq. Obs. Bot. 3:2. 
1768. Moth Bean. 

Annual herb forming a mass about .5 m in diameter and 
?3 as tall; stem short; branches slender, decumbent, not twining; 
leaflets narrowly 2-5 lobed; flowers yellow, small clustered on the 
ends of axillary peduncles; pods 2.5-5 cm long, linear, subterete, 
5 to 7 seeded; seed linear-oblong, nearly smooth, straw-colored, 
occasionally marbled with black. 

The moth bean is an important crop in India where 
reports give over half a million acres grown in Bombay 
and the northern provinces. It does not seem to be 
able to compete with other leguminous crops in America, 
however. 

2. Phaseolus mungo L. Mant. 1:101. 1767. 
Urd Bean. 

Low spreading annual with very hairy, usually procumbent, 
rarely twining branches; stipules with a basal appendage; leaflets 
more or less rhomboidal; flowers yellow, keel spirally coiled, a 
hornlike appendage or spur on the side; pods very hairy; seeds 
oblong, blackish to olive. 

The Urd or black gram is also grown in India about 
as much as the preceding species. It is grown as a 
green manure in Trinidad and is usually found used as 
food by the Hindus wherever they have settled. It has 
not been found equal to other legumes cultivated in the 
United States and unless new and unique uses are found 
for the plant it will probably not be used to any great 
extent in America. 

3. Phascolus aureus Roxb. FJ. Ind. 3:297. 1832. 
Mung Bean. Phaseolus mungo Auct. non L. 

Erect or suberect, pubescent annual 0.3 to 1.2 m tall; branches 
numerous, sometimes twining at the tips; leaflets ovate, entire or 
occasionally shallowly trilobate; flowers pale yellow, in clusters of 
10 to 25; pods black or brownish, 6.5 to 10 cm long, 10 to 14 seeded; 
seeds globose or oblong, usually green but occasionally marbled 
with black, yellow, brown, or madder; seed coat crenulate striate. 
Native to India. 

The mung bean is widely cultivated in southern 
Asia, parts of Malaysia, and eastern Africa. It has been 
introduced into China, Japan, Greece, the West Indies, 
and southeastern United States. Consequently, it has 



acquired a large number of local names. It is known as 
Green Gram, Golden Gram, Chiroko (East Africa), 
Bundoor Yayenari (Japan), Mash (Arabia), Lan-ton 
(China), Oregon or Chickasaw Pea, and doubtless 
numerous other names of more restricted usage. The 
name Oregon Pea, used in the South as early as 1854, 
arose from a mistaken idea as to its origin. The name 
Chickasaw Pea appeared at least 20 years earlier. 

The use of technical names has been quite as varied 
as that of the common names, due largely to Linneaus' 
confusion regarding the application of earlier designa- 
tions and current common names. 

In 1753 he apparently assumed that the Arabian 
" mash " applied to the soybean and that Dilleneus' 
Phaseolus radiatus (which was the true mung) applied 
to a related species which he grew at Upsala. In 1763 
he evidently discovered that he had not named the 
mung and described Phaseolus mungo. Unfortunately, 
this plant was not the common mung of India, but a 
form of the urd. Roxburgh about 70 years later, 
while working in India, applied Linneaus' names, 
assigning Phaseolus max and P. mungo to forms of 
the mung and P. radiatus to the urd. He also gave a 
new name, P. aureus, to one form of the mung. It is 
this name which must stand for the mung, while Lin- 
neaus' P. mungo is the valid name for the urd; the 
specific name max must be held for the soybean; and 
P. radiatus apparently is the proper name for a little- 
known plant at one time known as P. sublobatus of 
Roxburgh. The untangling of this nomenclatorial web 
is due largely to the researches of Sir David Prain of 
Kew and Professor C. V. Piper of the U. S. Department 
of Agriculture. (See U. S. D. A. Professional Paper 
119. 1914. Five Oriental Species of Beans by 
C. V. Piper and W. J. Morse.) 

According to Piper, " As a field crop the mung is 
directly comparable to the cowpea and soybean and it 
has nowhere proved superior to these." 

4. Phascolus calcaratus Roxb. Fl. Ind. 3:289. 
1832. Rice Bean. 

Annual herb, with stems 30 to 60 cm high and long twining 
prostrate branches 1 to 2 m long; leafs resembling those of P. 
vulgaris but the leaflets sometimes shallowly 3-lobed: flowers 
small, bright yellow; in clusters of 10-20; keel coiled, spurred on 
left petal; style hairy, prolonged in a narrow terete appendage; 
7 to 10 cm long; pods smooth, slender, falcate, straw colored, 
brownish or blackish; seeds 6 to 10, 5 to 8 mm long, straw colored, 
greenish, brownish, maroon or black. Native to India. 

The following forms have been described by Prain, Jour. 
As. Soc. Bengal. 66:22. 424, 425. 1897: 

(a) glabra Prain /. c. 424 (P. glaber Roxb.) has glabrous stems 
and leaves. 

(b) major Prain /. c. 424 has larger flowers. 

(c) Rumbaiya Prain /. c. 424 has short erect or spreading stems 
f probably P. torosus Roxb. I 

(d) gracilis Prain /. c. 425 a wild form with slender, smooth stems 
and narrow leaflets. 

The rice bean is cultivated to some extent in eastern 
and southern Asia, in parts of Malaysia and in Mauritius, 
but despite the fact that it has been naturalized in 
Alabama for over 25 years, it seems doubtful that it 
will compete successfully with the cowpea. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF BEANS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



13 



5. Phaseolus angularis W. F. Wight. U. S. D. A. 

B. P. I. Bulletin 137. 17. 1909. Adsuki Bean — 
Dolichos annularis Willd. Sp. PI. 3:1051. 1800. 

Bushy summer annual 30 to 50 cm high, leaves 3-folioIate, 
stipulate; leaflets entire, more or less rhomboidal, the lateral ones 
oblique; flowers bright yellow in clusters of 6 to 12; ketl coiled and 
spurred on the left side; style hairy, with a flattened terminal 
appendage; pods 6 to 13 cm long, thin, constricted between the 
seeds, straw colored, brown or black; seeds 8 to 10, small, straw 
colored, buff", brown, maroon, or black. Native to eastern Asia. 

The Adsuki bean is the most promising of the five 
oriental beans listed above. It is more nearly compar- 
able to the common or kidney bean in its climatic require- 
ments and hence is more likely to be of value in New 
York than are the others. It forms the second largest 
leguminous crop in Japan where the seeds are used as 
human food as they are in Chosen and to some extent 
in China and Manchuria. In trials of the Adsuki bean 
for food they have met the almost unanimous approval 
of those who tested them. Their seed production, as 
shown by trials at the U. S. D. A. Experimental Farm 
at Arlington, Virginia, was exceeded only by the soybean. 
Numerous varieties are under cultivation in the Orient, 
of which a maroon-seeded form is perhaps commonest. 
This form seems to have been the one brought from 
Japan by the Perry Expedition in 1854 and probably 
constitutes the first introduction of the Adsuki into the 
United States. 

6. Phaseolus coccineus L. Sp. PI. 724. 1753. 
Runner Bean. — Phaseolus vulgaris var. coccineus 
L. Sp. PI. ed. 2. 1016. 1763. Phaseolus multiflorus 
Lam. Encycl. 3:70. 1789. Phaseolus multiflorus 
coccineus D. C. Prod. 2:392. 1825. Lipusa multi- 
flora Alef. Landw. Fl. 26. 1866. Lipusa multiflora 
var. coccinea Alef. I.e. 27. Phaseolus vulgaris var. 
multiflorus Nichols. Diet. Card. 3:94. 1886. 

Annual i occasionally perennial in the South) twining plant, 
3-5 m tall; roots stout; stems slender, puberulent; leaves 3-foliate, 
large; leaflets rhombic ovate, acute to acuminate, 8 to 10 cm long; 
flowers showy, red, white, or variegated, racemes longer than the 
leaves; pods oblong, spurred at tip, 8-25 cm long; seeds 2 to 3 cm 
long, 1 to 1.5 cm wide, 0.6 to 0.9 cm thick, white, red, brownish red, 
brown, purple, or black; germination hypogeal. Probably native 
to Mexico and Central America. 

Besides the typical scarlet-flowered, high climbing form, there 
are several forms (or cultivars, as Bailey calls them) which have 
been designated as follows: 

(a) albus Bailey, Man. Cult. PI. 396. 1924. White Dutch 
Runner. — Phaseolus multiflorus var. albiflorus D. C. Prod. 
2:392. 1825. Phaseolus multiflorus var. albus Martens 
Gartenb. 82. 1860. Lipusa multiflora var. alba Alef. 
Landw. Fl. 26. 1866. Phaseolus coccineus var. albiflorus 
Bailey Gent. Herb. 7:125. 1923. 

Flowers white; pods 10 to 12 cm. long; seeds white. Grown 
primarily for the edible seeds. 

(b) rubroiiuims Bailey, Gent. Herb. 1:125. 1923. 

A bushy form with red or scarlet flowers. 

(c) :il bona mi-. Bailey, Gent. Herb. 1:125. 1923. 

A bushy form with white flowers which has been advertised as 
a bush lima. 

(dj bicolor Van Es. comb. nov. Butterfly Runner. — Phaseolus 

bicolor Vellozo, Fl. Flum. 311. 1825. P. multiflorus var. 

bicolor Martens Gartenb. 84. 1860. Lipusa multiflora 

var. bicolor Alef. Landw. Fl. 7. 1866. 

Flowers red and white; seeds variegated brown and yellow. 

Used largely as an ornamental. 



Two other forms that seem not to merit botanical designation 
have been separated on the color of the seed. One, a pure black 
seed form, was noted as Phaseolus multiflorus niger by Martens 
(/. c. 82), and the other, with small brownish yellow seeds, as 
Lipusa multiflora lucida Alef. (/. c. 27). 

All forms of the runner bean produce seeds of high value as 
food, but the white-seeded forms are usually preferred, while others 
are grown mostly as ornamentals. 

7. Phaseolus acutifolius A. Gray, PI. Wright. 
1:43. 1852. 

Annual twining plant; branches slender, puberulent; leaves 
3-foliate; petioles 3—4 cm long; leaflets lanceolate, 3 to 4.5 cm long, 
peduncles 2 to 5 flowered, shorter than the leaves; flowers white 
or purplish; calyx bilabiate, the upper lip scarcely emarginate 
dentate, the lateral and lower lobes deltoid, acute or acuminate; 
standard broad, emarginate; wings obovate to spatulate, longer 
than standard; keel narrow, coiled; stamens diadelphous (9 and 1); 
pod about 5 cm long, 7-10 seeded; seeds oval, slightly compressed. 
Native to Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico. 

There are two well-marked subspecies (or botanical varieties) 
differing largely in the shape of the leaves, as follows: 

(a) tenuifolius A. Gray. PI. Wright. 2:33. 1853.— Phaseolus 
tenuifolius Woot. & Standi. Contr. U. S. Nat. Herb. 16:140. 
1913. Leaflets linear oblong to elongated linear, petiolules of 
terminal leaflet 0.8 to 1.2 cm long. Apparently the common 
form in the western part of the species range. 

(b) latifolius Freeman, Ariz. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 68. 589. 
1912. Tepary Bean. — Phaseolus acutifolius var. 
(unnamed) A. Gray, PI. Wright. 2:33. 1853. 

This is the cultivated tepary of the arid regions of Arizona 
and Northern Mexico. A very careful and complete description 
was made by Freeman (1. c.) based on a large amount of material. 
It is here repeated: 

" Annual, stems recumbent, spreading or twining, .5-3 m long, 
glabrous to puberulent. Leaves smooth above with prominent 
veins beneath, glabrous throughout or slightly puberulent beneath. 
Stipules lanceolate, 2 mm long, 1 mm broad, striate, appressed. 
Petioles slender, 2-10 cm long (ave. length 6.8 cm). Leaflets 
stipellate. Terminal leaflet stalked, large, 4-9.5 cm long (ave. 
length 6.4 cm), 2, 2-5.2 cm wide (ave. width 3.7 cm) average ratio 
of length to width 1.74., ovate to broadly lanceolate, at the apex 
gradually narrowed and acute. Petiolule of terminal leaflets 
1.6-3.4 cm (ave. length 2.2 cm) 'ong. The side leaflets are the 
same general shape as the terminal leaflet but slightly smaller and 
inequilateral. Length 3.8-7.8 cm (ave. length 5.6 cm) width 
2.0-5.0 cm (ave. width 3.3 cm). Inflorescence axillary, leaves 
superior, peduncles slender, in the upper part bearing 2-5 flowers. 
Bracts and bractlets small, deciduous. Flowers medium sized, 
pedicellate, white or pale violet. Calyx short, 3-4 mm long, 
broadly campanulate, four toothed (the upper two lobes united 
into one), teeth acuminate, pubescence on teeth and calyx scattered 
and fragile. Banner broad, emarginate, in flower more than half 
reflexed, at the base biauriculate, 8-10 mm long. Wings exceeding 
the banner, obovate to spatulate, 10-15 mm long on one side auricu- 
late. Keel narrow, two or three turns to the spiral. Stamens 
united in two sets (9 and 1). Legume 2-7 seeded [average 4.9), 
5-9 cm long (ave. 7.3 cm), 8-13 mm wide (ave. 10.5 mm) ciliate when 
young, puberulent, slightly pubescent or smooth when mature, 
straight or slightly curved. Seed of different varieties white, 
yellow, brown or bluish black to deep violet, either self-colored or 
variously flecked. No red seeded varieties have yet been observed. 
In form the seeds are round-oval to nearly round, as is the Navy 
bean, to strongly flattened like a diminutive lima." 

Freeman found about a dozen varieties that breed 
true to type and over 30 others, many of which were 
tested insufficiently to determine the amount of vari- 
ability. The most important forms were the White 
Tepary, the Speckled Yellow, and the Brown Speckled. 
The first has since come into considerable prominence 



14 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



in the central valley of California and in parts of southern 
California and is, according to Henry (California 
Agr. Exp. Sta. Bulletin 294. 312. 1918), "The most 
drought resistant bean grown in California." 

8. Phaseolus vulgaris L. Sp. PI. 723. 1753. 
Kidney or Common Bean. — P. esculentus Salisb. 
Prod. 335. 1796. P. lilac Zucc. in Roem. Collect. 
148. 1809. P. nigerritnus Juss. ex Zucc. 1. c. P. 
compressus DC. Prod. 2. 392. 1825. P. oblongus 
Savi Nouvo Giorn. Pisa 10:37. 1825. P. romanus 
Savi /. c. 37. P. saponaceus Savi 1. c. 39. P. tumidus 
Savi /. c. 39. P. haematocarpus Savi /. c. 40. P. 
sphaericus Savi /. c. 40. P. gonosperumus Savi 
/. c. 41. P. mexicanus Mart. Horf. i?e£. Monac. 
185. 1829. P. dimidiatUS Haberle ex Schuebl. 8b 
Mart. Fl. Wuert. 472. 1834. P. nigricans Haberle 
1. c. P. ionocarpus Fingerh. Linnaea 10:8. 1836. 
P. amoentts Fingerh. /. c. P. melanospennus 
Fingerh. /. c. 8. P. zebra Fingerh. /. c. 9. P. tri- 
angulus Fingerh. 1. c. 12. P. praecox Fingerh. /. c. 
17. P. subglobosus Fingerh. 1. c. 20. P. oiali- 
spermus Fingerh. /. c. 21. P. lupinoides Fingerh. 
/. c. 24. P. vexillatus Blanco F/. F^'p 574. 1837. 
P. pictus Cav. ex Steud. 7Vo/n. ed. 2. 2:317. 1841. 
P. angulosus Schuebl. 8b Mart, in Mart. Gartenb. 47. 
1860. P. asparagoides Schur. Enum. PI. Transs. 
177. 1866. P. cruentus Hort. ex Schur. /. c. P. 
sinensis Hort. ex Schur. /. c. 

Erect, bushy to long twining, annual, 0.3 to 5 m tall: stems 
furrowed, more or less pubescent or puberulent: leaves usually 
somewhat pubescent on both sides, paler beneath; stipules small, 
deltoid; leaflets rhombic to deltoid ovate, acute to acuminate, 
rounded, truncate, or sub-cordate at base; peduncles usually axillary, 
shorter than the petioles; flowers 1-8, white, yellowish, or purplish; 
bracteoles ovate, about as long as the calyx; calyx bilabiate, the 
teeth of the upper lobe obsolete or very short, the lower lobes deltoid 
ovate; standard sharply reflexed, marginate, with lateral auricles; 
wings obovate longer than standard; keel strongly coiled; upper 
stamen with an appendage at the base; pods slender, usually some- 
what falcate, the tip sharp and straight and more often recurved; 
seeds variable but generally terete or bluntly and broadly elliptical 
in cross-section, often reniform. Native to tropical America, 
a forma nanus Van Es. n. comb. — Phaseolus nanus Juslen. 
in L. Cent. PI. 1:23. 1.755. Phaseolus vulgaris var. 
nanus Aschers, Fl. Prov. Brand. 170. 1864. Phaseolus 
vulgaris var. nonscandens Bailey, Gent. Herb. 1:122. 1923. 
Stem often ending in an inflorescence; plants erect, bushy, 
usually not climbing and not twining. As crosses of pole beans 
are sometimes dwarf and vice versa one can scarcely give dwarf 
beans a status higher than that of forma. 

The name Phaseolus vulgaris humilis Alefeld, Landw. 
Fl. 10. 1866 has been used for this form, but Alefeld used the 
name in a very restricted sense, applying it to one of the 124 
" Abarten " which he lists and which are merely Latin names for 
horticultural varieties, nor distinct botanical forms. Alefeld 
recognized the status of the form nanus and gives it in the work 
cited as a new combination. This was an error, however, as the 
combination had been made two years earlier by Ascherson. 

This form includes numerous horticultural varieties all of 
which are known as " bush beans " in contrast to the varieties 
usually known as " pole beans." 

Alefeld recognized another form medium , but this seems 
to be merely a group of the lower forms of pole beans. They have 
no true characters separating them from the pole beans into which 
they merge. 

Phaseolus vulgaris, as now known, is a very 



variable species including about 500 named horticultural 
varieties. Whether or not this great assemblage of 
forms arose from a single variable wild species or from 
a group of closely allied species is a question not likely 
to be solved satisfactorily from available data. How- 
ever, the behavior of Phaseolus acutifolius may be 
considered suggestive. Here, a single wild species 
varying somewhat in leaf shape shows about 100 seed 
forms in cultivation, many of which breed true to type. 
This fact might lead one to prefer the idea of the origin 
of our cultivated forms from a single species not now 
certainly known in the wild state. 

While these forms do not seem to admit of segrega- 
tion into strict botanical catagories, Savi iMem. Phas. 
.i:l-18. 1826), Martens iDie Gartenbohnen 1860), 
and Alefeld t Landwirtschaftliche Flora 1866) divide 
the kidney beans into a number of what Alefeld calls 
" Varietaten Gruppen " and " Abarten." 

Because of the use that has been made of Martens' 
classification which was based largely on seed form, it is 
worth noting here the seven species he recognized with 
the number of divisions and forms listed. His ultimate 
divisions, based largely on seed color, correspond nearly 
to present day horticultural varieties and a fairly well- 
known variety that, in shape of seed and pod, is repre- 
sentative of each of his species, is therefore added. 
I. P. vulgaris Savi 5 div., 34 forms) Turtle Soup. 
II. P. compressus Martens i3 div., 18 forms' Dutch 
Case Knife. 

III. P. gonospernnus Savi (2 div., 9 forms Cut Short. 

IV. P. carinatus Martens )2 forms I White Lyonnaise. 
V. P. oblongus Savi (3 div., 22 forms' Dwarf 

Mohawk. 
VI. P. ellipticus Martens (2 div., 17 forms) Early 

Yellow Six Weeks. 
VII. P. sphaericus Martens (2 div., 18 forms) Indian 
Chief. 

The stem of the kidney bean is strictly annual and 
the difference in length of node between various sorts 
of bush beans and of pole beans considered separately is 
interpreted as being due to two or more genetic factors 
which, according to Emerson, are non-dominant and 
independently inherited. However, the distinction 
between the true pole and the true bush types is con- 
sidered as being due to a single pair of characters; the 
indeterminate growth habit of the pole beans being 
dominant over the determinate habit of the bush beans. 
The inheritance of growth factors has been treated at 
length by Emerson [Nebraska Agr. Exp. Sta. Research 
Bulletin 7. 1916) and Norton {Am. Nat. 49:547-561. 
1915). Norton finds true dwarf types with indetermi- 
nate inflorescence and also with very short internodes. 

The bean plant develops a strong tap root usually 
penetrating the soil for 2 feet or more. There are 
numerous laterals with a spread of 4 or 5 feet and 
filamentous roots penetrating the soil to a depth of 
5 feet or more under favorable circumstances. How- 
ever, it seems that the great bulk of feeding roots are 
in the top foot of soil and spread 2 to 2 J _> feet on every 
side of the stem. The behavior of Wardwell's Kidney 
Wax bean has been investigated thoroughly by Weaver 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF BEANS, AND THEIR ALLIES 



15 



and Bruner (Root Development of Vegetable Crops 
184 ff. 1927^. The strain of nitrogen-fixing bacteria 
on bean roots seems to be specific for Phaseolus. 

The leaves vary in color from light green to dark 
green in different varieties and there seems to be some 
correlation between depth of seed coat color and dark- 
ness of leaves. 

The flowers are showy, white, purplish, or yellowish 
and are borne in closely aggregated clusters on the ends 
of short peduncles. The inflorescences of the pole beans 
appear continually during the season, due to the inde- 
terminate habit of the stem, and flowers and fruits in 
all stages of development may be found on a plant at 
the same time. On the bush beans, however, due to 
the determinate growth of the stem, the flowers appear 
almost simultaneously and the fruits mature together. 
The corolla is of the typical " butterfly " type. The 
upper petal or standard is large and bends sharply 
backward. The lateral petals or wings extend forward 
and are considerably longer than the standard. The 
two lower petals form the keel which in this genus is 
spirally coiled at the tip. The stamens and style are 
included within the keel and the end of the style is 
coiled in the same manner as the tip of the keel. 

Due to this peculiar infolding and coiling of the 
lower petals, the flower presents considerable hindrance 
to cross-pollination by insects, though bees and some 
other insects do succeed in pollinating a small propor- 
tion of bean flowers. Emerson (1. c.) found from 
to 10 per cent of crossing in lines with which he was 
working and Kristofferson iHereditas 2:395—400. 1921) 
found 0.19 per cent in green-shelled varieties, 0.8 per 
cent in snap beans, and 1.42 per cent in dry field beans. 
Many varieties showed no crosses. Self pollination 
occurs readily. Pollen grains may begin to germinate 
4 or 5 hours before pollination actually occurs, according 
to Weinstein (Am. Jour. Bot. 13:248. 1926), and 
the tube enters the micropyle of the ovule within 8 or 
9 hours after pollination. The chromosome number of 
the varieties thus far examined is n=ll. 

The inheritance of color in the bean flower has been 
studied by Shaw [Massachusetts Agr. Exp. Sta. 
Bulletin 25 1-24. 1913.) and three types of color, 
carmine red, rose, and white differentiated. Rose and 
light rose seem to behave alike, but there may be two 
factors involved in white. Pending further investiga- 
tions, however, it may be said that of the colors given 
carmine red is dominant over either of the others and 
rose is dominant over white, both apparently in a straight 
3:1 ratio. 

The fruit of beans is a typical legume, a pod with a 
single cavity opening along both dorsal and ventral 



sutures when dry. Unlike peas, the calyx is not per- 
sistent, though the base of the style forms a sharp tip 
to the pod. Various pod characters have been studied 
genetically. Green color is dominant over yellow in the 
unripe pod in straight Mendelian ratio (*); round 
shape is likewise dominant over flat (*) ; blunt apex 
over sharp ( 3 ); non-constricted over constricted 
threshable over non-threshable (*); irregular segregation 
was found in the results of crossing broad-podded forms 
and narrow-podded ones ('"<, and long-podded and short- 
podded forms i : i , though parchmented forms were found 
to be purely recessive when crossed with non-parch- 
mented types. 

The seeds are borne alternately on the two placentae 
bordering the ventral suture. There is a wide variation 
in color, size, and shape of the seeds; and although there 
have been numerous genetic studies of the factors 
involved, the results are so complicated as to render 
attempts at generalizations useless. This study is 
further complicated by the fact that the shade of color 
of the seed coats is liable to change in storage. 

Selection of improved types has been the type of 
breeding work of most practical value thus far. Johann- 
sen (Uber Erblichkeit in populationem und in 
reinen Linien Jena, 1903; has shown that pure lines 
are very generally stable and mutations occur very 
rarely. 

Beans are subject to several diseases in this State, 
blight (Bacterium phaseoli) , wilt (B. flaccumfaciens) , 
anthracnose (Colletotrichum lindemuthianum), 
rust (Uromyces appendiculatus) , root rot iFusarium 
spp.), and mosaic being the chief maladies. The bean 
weevil and the Mexican bean beetle are the chief insect 
pests. 

9. Phaseolus lunatus L. Sp. PI. 724. 1753. 
Lima Bean. — P. inamoenus L. Sp. PL 724. 1753. 
P. rufus Jacq. Hort. Vindob. 1:13. 1770. P. 
bipunctatus Jacq. 1. c. 144. P. tunkinensis Lour. 
Fl. Cochinch. 435. 1790. P. macrocarpus Moench. 
Meth. 155. 1794. P. Xuarezii Zucc. in Roem. 
Collect. 4:149. 1809. P. saccharatus Stokes Bot. 
Mat. Med. 4:16. 1812. P. parviflorus Stokes /. c. 
4:18. 1812. P. macrocarpus Poir. Encycl. Suppl. 
3:6. 1813. P. derasus Schrank, PL Rar. Hort. 
Monac. 89. 1819. P. puberulus H. B. K. Nov. Gen. 
& Sp. 6:451. 1823. P. maximus Roxb. Fl. Ind. 
3:288. 1832. P. ilocanus Blanco Fl. Filip 572. 1837. 
P. vexillatus Blanco 1. c. 2 74. P. dumosus Macf. 
FL Jam. 1. 279. 1837. P. limensis Macf. /. c. 
P. foecundus Macf. /. c. 281. P. latisiliquus Macf. 
/. c. 282. P. saccharatus Macf. /. c. 282. P. platy- 
spermus Haberle in Steud. Nom. erf. 2. 2: 17. 1841. 



(>) Emerson, Mass. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bulletin 25 1-24. 1913: Lock, Ann. Roy. Bot. Gard. 3:95ff. 1906: and Tschermak, Zeits. 
Pflanz. Zucht. l:65ff. 1916. 

Tschermak, /. c. 

Tschermak, /. c. and Zeits. Abst. u. Vererb. 28:28ff. 1922. 
(«) Tjebbes & Kooiman, Genetics 4:447ff. 1922. 
( 5 j Emerson /. c. 
(«) Tschermak /. c. 
P) Emerson /. c. ; Tschermak /. c. . and Wellensick, Genetica 4:443ff. 1922. 



16 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



P. lunatus var. macrocarpus Benth. in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 15:181. 1862. P. amazonicus Benth. 1. c. 

Climbing or erect, pubescent or glabrate; leaves 3-foliolate, 
leaflets ovate or rhomboid, acute, entire, 5 to 14 cm long, dull 
green above, paler beneath; stipules small, deltoid; flowers numerous, 
small, greenish yellow or white, in racemes at the end of peduncles 
as long or longer than the petioles; calyx bracts linear to oval; calyx 
broadly campanulate with broad deltoid lobes; pods 5 to 12 cm 
long, 2 to 2.5 cm wide, the margin variously thin to very thick, the 
beak sharp and slender to stout and blunt; seeds flat and thinnish, 
or thick oval, 1.0 to 2.0 cm long with more or less conspicuous lines 
radiating from the hilum. Native to tropical America, but widely 
grown throughout the world and firmly established in many places. 

There are three outstanding groups in cultivation in 
America, viz., the so-called Big Limas, the Potato 
Limas, and the Sieva or Small Lima beans. All varia- 
tions between these types seem to exist in wild plants 
from Central and South America and indeed, many of 
these varieties have found their way into Africa and the 
far East. Under such conditions it seems inadvisable 
to treat the cultivated segregates as distinct botanical 
subspecies, though it may be well to include them as 
forms in order to have ready reference to the variations 
listed in various publications. For a more detailed dis- 
cussion of these forms, the reader is referred to "Varia- 
tion in the Lima Bean, Phaseolus lunatus, as 
illustrated by its synonymy." New York State 
Agr. Exp. Station Technical Bulletin 182. 1931. 

The following forms have been distinguished: 
(a) forma macrocarpus Van Es. 

This is the big lima type often listed as var. macrocarpus 
Benth. or as P. limensis Macf 



(b) forma salicis Van Es. 

This form is the willow leaved type described as Phaseolus 
lunatus var. salicis Bailey Gent. Herb. 1:123. 1923. 

(c) forma lunonanus Van Es. 

The dwarf bush Sieva type was described as Phaseolus 
lunatus var. lunonanus by Bailey /. c. 

(d) forma limenanus Van Es. 

The bush or dwarf form of the big lima was described as 
Phaseolus limensis var. limenanus by Bailey 1. c. 125. 

(e) forma solanoides Van Es. 

The so-called potato type differs from other forms in the more 
triangular leaflets and the more nearly spheroidal seeds. 

Since neither flower characters nor those of the 
fruit and leaf can be used to separate the material grown 
outside the United States, it is thought best for the 
purpose of this volume to hold all forms under the 
specific name Phaseolus lunatus and to leave the 
subdivisions of the group to the ordinary horticultural 
practice as given in the succeeding chapters. In this 
connection the opinion of that careful student of the 
legumes, C. V. Piper, should be quoted. After years 
of work with the entire group, he says, " This is a very 
diverse aggregation of both wild and cultivated forms 
whose status is variously interpreted by different 
botanists. In the writer's judgment it is but a single 
botanical species." (Studies in American Phaseo- 
lineae, Contr. U. S. N. H. 22:694. 1926.) 

The American horticultural varieties are all of 
comparatively recent development and the selection 
work of Shaw {California Agr. Exp. Sta. Bulletin 
238. 1913.) seems to show that a fruitful field in 
breeding awaits the experimenter in this group. 

Two diseases, downy mildew (Phytophthora 
phaseoli) and pod blight (Diaporthe phaseolorum) 
are reported as specific to this crop. Bacterial spot 
(Bacterium vignae) also is reported to attack both 
pods and leaves. 



CHAPTER III 

DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 

GENERAL NOTES 



The descriptions and histories of bean varieties 
which follow are arranged into six classes, viz., Pole 
Garden Beans, Bush Garden Beans, Field Beans, Horti- 
cultural Beans, Lima Beans, and Runner Beans. The 
trials on which the descriptions are based were started 
at Geneva in 1922, the test plat having some 400 varieties 
and strains that year. In addition to this, rather com- 
plete trials were conducted during the years 1923, 1927, 
and 1930. Records were also available of the early 
trials of garden beans as conducted in 1882 and 1883 
by Prof. Henry H. Wing. These early records contained 
much valuable material descriptive of the varieties in 
common usage at that time as well as offering comparison 
with descriptions of the same varieties grown at the 
present time. In addition to the early work of Wing, 
there were also available the very excellent monographs 
on beans by Irish, 1901; Tracy, 1903; and Jarvis, 1908, 
as well as the earlier publications on lima beans by 
Bailey, 1895-96. These earlier works furnished the 
basis for the list of varieties to be grown and were natu- 
rally a source of information to use in checking the records 
as found during the recent trials. Recourse to old cata- 
logs was made to complete the list of variety names and 
the current issues carefully checked for the newer intro- 
ductions. Seed of the better known varieties was secured 
direct from the large wholesale growers of bean seed in 
order to have as dependable material as possible in 
describing the standard sorts. A large number of 
variety names were found in only a few catalogs, seed 
of which was secured direct from the company which 
offered the seed for sale. 

The trial grounds of W. Atlee Burpee Co. at Doyles- 
town, Pa.; D. Landreth Seed Co., Bristol, Pa.; J. B. 
Rice Seed Co., Cambridge, N. Y.; Ferry Morse Seed Co., 
Detroit, Mich. ; and the U. S. Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, D. C, were visited by one or more of the 
authors in order to see as many varieties as possible 
growing under similar conditions and the same varieties in 
different environments. The above-named institutions, 
together with the following, have freely supplied seed 
stock during the trial period: The Associated Seed Grow- 
ers, Inc., New Haven, Conn.; S. D. Woodruff & Sons, 
Orange, Conn.; Rogers Bros. Seed Co., Chicago, 111.; 
Alfred J. Brown Seed Co., Grand Rapids, Mich.; Wash- 
burn-Wilson Seed Co., Moscow, Idaho; and many others. 

In order to compile the material pertaining to the 
histories of the varieties, it has been necessary to seek 
information from a large number of individuals. This 
information has been freely forthcoming and has greatly 
facilitated the gathering together of the facts concerning 
the originators and the introducers of many of our earlier 
varieties. Without this patient cooperation it is certain 
that much of the material presented here would have 



remained unearthed. The authors extend sincere thanks 
to individuals in the firms above mentioned, to many 
other individuals of the seed trade, and to co-workers 
at other institutions whose names remain unmentioned 
because of lack of space. 

As stated in the preface this work was under the 
direct charge of F. H. Hall from its inception continu- 
ously up to the time of his death in 1929. Associated 
with him in the carrying out of the project was Leslie 
R. Hawthorn, since January 1931 of the Texas Station. 
The authors have attempted to carry the work to its 
completion and to organize and to write up the material 
with as few errors as possible. However, since errors 
undoubtedly exist, the writers will be most grateful for 
any suggestions that may be forthcoming. 

The photographs for the five colored plates of seeds 
were taken in October 1925, all others were taken during 
the summer of 1923. These illustrations are used as 
originally made with the variety names as they appear 
on the original plates. They serve to illustrate the 
widely divergent pod types and characteristics as well 
as to indicate, especially in the seed, the range of variation 
that occurs within a variety. 

For recording the characteristics of the varieties 
grown, check sheets were used, each characteristic being 
so sub-divided that a simple check mark made the record. 
In this connection it may be well to point out the diffi- 
culty in recording separatory characters on a large 
number of varieties any one season. The edible beans 
come on very rapidly and data on many characters must 
be taken within a narrow spread of time. In collecting 
the data and in preparing it for publication, technical 
terms have been avoided as far as possible and the 
description written for the practical grower and seeds- 
man. The attempt has been made to standardize the 
descriptive writing so that the data are given in the 
same order for each variety. A glossary of terms used 
is given below. 

The choosing of the correct name to use for each 
variety has been given careful consideration. Wherever 
possible the principles applied in " Standardized Plant 
Names " have been used, but inasmuch as names of 
varieties of vegetables are not listed in that work it has 
been necessary for the authors to decide upon the names 
without recourse to a standard guide. In the great 
majority of cases the names now in common usage 
remain unchanged. Many names have been shortened 
in the interest of simplicity and " to make merchandising 
and buying easier." Where the recorded data have 
shown reasonably sure evidence of " identity " between 
two or more varieties, the authors have tried to preserve 
the name which seemed to offer the strongest case for 
its maintenance and listed the others as synonyms. 



17 



18 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



It is here that our judgment will be subject to argument 
and further trials will be necessary to settle the contended 
point. It is our belief that within the thousand or more 
variety names of beans there is particular chaos of name 
duplication and, what is more evident, an all too free 
use of descriptive adjectives that have little true mean- 
ing when the varieties are brought together in com- 
parative trials. 

In a publication of this type in which an attempt 
has been made to write an account of all varieties, not 
only in New York, as the title would indicate, but those 
of North America as well, it would neither be possible 
nor appropriate to attempt a specific classification and 
key to the varieties used. At best, it would fail to do 
justice to many of the varieties classified under certain 
groups, inasmuch as they would have been grown under 
unfavorable conditions. It is evident, therefore, that 
because of size, and perhaps color changes that might 
be incurred, some varieties would be classified improp- 
erly. As several attempts have been made at classifying 
this crop and since it is almost impossible to develop 
one adaptable to all sections that would be a distinct 
contribution, it has been considered best to discuss 
briefly each of the present classifications and keys and 
to refer the reader to the originals for further use. 

It was not until 1860 that the first attempt was 
made to write a monograph on Phaseolus vulgaris. 
At that time George Von Martens published his book, 
Die Gartenhohen. He separated the varieties of the 
common garden beans into seven species. Phaseolus 
Imiat'is and P. coccincus (P. multiflorus) were also 
listed. These were sub-divided again according to the 
color and shape of the seed, together with a designation 
of plant type as either dwarf or climbing, to act as an 
additional separating feature of varieties. 

The next attempt of this type was made in 1892- 
93 by Henry H. Wing, at that time Assistant Director 
of the New York Agricultural Experiment Station at 
Geneva. He followed to some extent the same horti- 
cultural classification as did Von Martens, i. e., the color 
and shape of the mature seeds and the presence or ab- 
sence of the dwarf and climbing habit. In addition, 
however, he added color of edible pod, inserting this 
characteristic in the same heading with color of the seed. 
He apparently thought of including leaf characters as 
an index in separating varieties, but later suggested 
that, although considerable variation existed in size, 
shape, and color of leaves among varieties, such differ- 
ences occurred almost as frequently on the same or 
separate plants of the same variety. 

Wing used what might be termed a combination 
key. The first portion was purely technical, based 
entirely upon abstract terms, and used to designate the 
type rather than the complete list of varieties that would 
come under the classification. The first division was 
based on general size, followed by one based upon the 
shape of the mature seed. In addition to these a still 
smaller group was fixed according to the color of the 
seed coats and the edible pods. This portion set forth 
the variation of color, viz., white, black, solid color 



neither white nor black, or variegated. In the same 
heading appeared the color of the edible pod, whether 
green, greenish yellow, or yellow. The terms climbing 
and dwarf were also used to serve as added varietal 
divisions. 

In 1898, H. C. Irish of the Missouri Botanical 
Garden completed his monograph entitled " Garden 
Beans Cultivated as Esculents," Mo. Bot. Gard. 12th 
Report. 81-165. 1901. He began his classification 
with a key to three species of Phaseolus, based on 
size of seed, shape, markings, and size and color of 
flowers. This was followed by a complete description 
of each species and a key to the horticultural varieties 
treated. This key was based on the following character- 
istics in order of their importance as segregating char- 
acters: Size and shape of seeds and pods, followed by 
seed color, size, plant growth habit, pod length, and, for 
P. lunatus, the additional characteristics of leaf shape 
and season of utility. 

The next publication on this crop, "American 
Varieties of Garden Beans " by W. W. Tracy, Jr. was 
issued in 1907 as United States Department of Agri- 
culture Bureau of Plant Industry Bulletin No. 109. 
It was the result of a careful variety study carried out 
at the vegetable testing grounds at Washington, D. C, 
and cooperatively at several of the state experiment 
stations throughout the country. 

Tracy developed one key based on the taxonomic 
characters of the five species of garden beans and 
another of the artificial type based on horticultural 
characters. This was the first attempt by an investi- 
gator to suggest for bean varieties a key that contained 
several plant characteristics other than those of seed and 
pod. An honest endeavor was made to enable the 
student to identify a variety regardless of the stage of 
development. The artificial key suggested by Tracy 
was unique in its application to bean variety studies. 

This was followed a year later by Cornell Bulletin 
260 " American Varieties of Beans " written by C. D. 
Jarvis of the Cornell University Agricultural Experiment 
Station. This paper represented the compilation of data 
over a period of ten years or more, since it included 
previous work of L. H. Bailey, cooperative work of N. B. 
Keeney & Son at Le Roy, N. Y., as well as the trials 
conducted by Mr. Jarvis at Connecticut and Ithaca. 

Jarvis began his classification by citing one for 
field beans suggested by J. W. Gilmore of that Station. 
This was based on the shape, the length, and the ratio 
of length to width and thickness of seed. This was 
followed by what he termed " The Key to Economic 
Ivarieties] of the Genus Phaseolus." This was based 
entirely upon the characteristics of the dry seed the 
season harvested. The following characters were used: 
presence or absence of conspicuous converging or radi- 
ating lines extending from the hilum to the dorsal 
margin: width of seed; shape; solid or variegated color; 
color of markings; hilar markings; length, shape of cross- 
section; ratio of length to width; shape of ends; type of 
demarkation between colored and white portion; solid 
colored areas; stripes; prominent, non-prominent, or 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



19 



depressed hilum; prominent or non -prominent hypo- 
cotyl; ventral or dorsal margin straight or rounded; 
and seed lop-sided or non-lop-sided. 

No keys are included in this volume, but the 
arrangement of historical and descriptive material 
follows the divisions generally accepted by horticulturists 
as indicated below; which also follows the botanical 
classification except for the segregation of the field and 
horticultural groups. 

The Pole Varieties of Garden Beans 

Green Pods 

Wax Pods 
The Dwarf Varieties of Garden Beans 

Green Pods 

Wax Pods 
The Horticultural or Shell Beans 

Pole Varieties 

Dwarf Varieties 
The Field Beans 
The Lima Beans 

Pole Varieties 

Dwarf Varieties 
The Runner Beans 

It will be seen that this grouping is also the group- 
ing used by the seedsman in his catalog. The varieties 
within each group are arranged alphabetically without 
further differentiation into those varieties of greater or 
lesser importance. 

GLOSSARY 
Acute Sharp-angled; when the angle at the dorsal edge or 

surface of a pod is less than 90 degrees. 
Anterior With reference to the end of the bean seed nearest 

the micropyle. 
Apical The upper third of a plant; the growing point or 

apex. 
Basal The lower third of a plant; the base; the portion 

just above the crown. 
Bearing The number of days from the first picking to the 

season last, subdivided into early, midseason, or late. 

Bloom A waxy, natural protective substance on seeds, and 

occasionally on leaves, stems and pods. 

Blotched Marked with spots of irregular shape and size. 

Butterfly The more or less distinct wing-like color markings 

markings about the hilum. 

Carpellary The line of splitting on the dorsal surface of the pod 

suture — the opposite of the placental suture. 

Climbing When the growth habit of a plant enables it to 

twine and at the same time cling to a support. 
Color Flower colors are described by use of Ridgeway 's 

terms; seed colors are given in common color 

terms with the Ridgeway term in parenthesis. 
Compact When the growth habit of a plant is close; opposed 

to open habit. 
Constricted . . . When the surface of a pod is alternately depressed 

and swollen to a greater or lesser degree. 
Cordate When the cross-section of a pod or seed is heart 

shaped; rather deeply indented at the placental 

suture. 
Crease-backed When the cross-section of a pod shows that the 

placental suture is indented or depressed. 
Crest With reference to the dorsal or carpellary surface 

of a pod. 
Crowded When the seeds of a snap pod are very close to- 
gether, resulting in the formation of beans with 

truncated ends. 

Crumpled Coarsely wrinkled. 

Curved Concave to the horizontal plane of the upper 

(placental) suture. 



Cylindrical. . The shape of the seed or pod approaching that of 
a cylinder; sides nearly parallel. 

Dorsal The carpellary surface; in the pod it is opposite 

the side to which the seeds are attached; in the 
seed, the side opposite the hilum. 
Double- When the cross-section of a pod shows a deep 

barrelled indentation at both the placental and carpellary 

sutures. 

End The distal portion of the pod excluding the spur. 

Elliptical This applies to a cross-section of a pod or seed, 

when its shape is like a narrow ellipse. 
Erect When the natural growth habit of a plant is up- 
right; not spreading. 

Eye-ring The more or less distinct color band about the 

hilum. 

Flat This applies to the width and thickness of a pod 

or seed when the cross-section of either is elliptical 
or nearly so. 

Fleshy When a large portion of the pod is succulent and 

meaty; with a minimum amount of parchment and 
string. 

Fiber The tough layer of parchment in the walls of a 

bean pod, varying in amount with the variety and 
stage of development. 
Filled to When the seeds in a snap pod fill it from the pla- 

the edge cental to the carpellary suture. 

Filled to When the snap pod is filled with seeds from the 

the tip neck to the end. 

Green-shell The period in the development of a pod when the 

stage latter is too tough to be edible yet the enclosed 

seeds are tender and entirely free from hardening. 

Growth The type of plant produced, either dwarf or bush, 

habit or tall or viny, and more fully described by such 

specific terms as to express the character of growth. 

Hilar surface. . The area on which is located the hilum or eye; the 

ventral surface. 

Height This is ordinarily meant to represent the distance 

from the crown to the top of the plant. 
Inch mark. ... A distinct cross mark appearing on pods of certain 
varieties, the distance between which is quite 
uniform — approximately one inch apart. 

Intemode The area between nodes or joints. 

Loment-like. . . When the constrictions of the pod are decidedly 
deep and well defined. 

Mottled Marked with spots of different colors, or shades of 

colors. 

Neck The proximal portion of the pod, excluding the 

peduncle. 

Nodes The enlargement of the stem from which originate 

the leaves, flower stalks and branches; the joint. 

Oblate With reference to the cross-section of a pod when 

the main axis is shorter than the horizontal dia- 
meter. 

Obovate With reference to the cross-section of a pod when 

the smaller end is at the placental suture. 

Obtuse Broadly angled; when the angle of the dorsal edge 

or surface of a pod is more than 90 degrees. 

Open When the growth habit of a dwarf plant is loose; 

the intermediate stage between spreading and 
compact. 

Oval This applies when the cross-section of a seed or pod 

is broadly elliptical. 

Ovate This applies to the cross-section of a pod or seed 

when it is more or less egg-shaped, wider at one end 
than the other. 
Placental The line of splitting on the ventral surface of the 

suture pod along the inner side of which the seeds are 

attached; the portion in which the greater part of 
the placental vascular tissue is located. 
Pods borne ... . The relative position on the plant where the 
majority of the pods are attached. 



20 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Posterior With reference to the end of the bean seed nearest 

the caruncle. 
Prostrate When the plant or portion of a plant grows more or 

less flat to the ground. 
Protuberant. . . When the extension of an object above the adjacent 

surface is pronounced. 
Quality The condition of the bean at the snap stage or its 

equivalent as suggested by such characteristics as 

fleshiness, brittleness, stringiness or their lack of 

them. 
Recurved Convex to the horizontal plane of the upper (pla- 
cental) suture. 
Regular When the surface of a pod is without constrictions 

or swollen portions. 

Reniform Kidney-shaped. 

Rhomboidal . . . Applied to seeds with truncated ends when the 

angle of the end and the side is oblique. 
Round Applied to seeds or pods when the cross-section of 

either is circular or nearly so. 
S-curved Alternately concave and convex to the horizontal 

plane of the upper (placental) suture. 
Scimitar- When the curve of a pod is abruptly concave. 

curved 
Speckled When the color of the seed coat is dotted with very 

small, rather distinct, diminutive spots. 
Spheroidal .... Similar in shape to a sphere. 
Spur The portion of the pod extending from the distal 

end; the tip. 
Straight- When the cross-section of a pod shows that the 

backed placental suture in cross-section is straight, not 

depressed or humped. 

Streaked Marked with rather long, irregular stripes. 

Stringiness .... A term referring to the relative toughness of the 

fibro-vascular bundles along either or both placental 

and carpellary sutures. 

Striped Marked with a long, narrow stripe or stripes. 

Suture The edge of a pod, either the line along which a 

dry pod will split, or its opposite. 
Texture The condition of a pod or leaf as manifested by 

the presence of large or small cells; the coarseness 

or fineness of the " grain." 
Trailing When the growth habit of a plant is long and 

prostrate. 

Truncate When the seed is abruptly flattened at the ends. 

Twining When the growth habit of a plant is intermediate 

between climbing and trailing; plants lack the 

ability to cling to a support. 
Ventral The placental surface in a pod, the side to which 

the seeds are attached; in the seed, the side of the 

hilum. 
Vigor The vegetative condition of a plant as manifested 

by the comparative sturdiness of growth. 
Wrinkled A surface that is slightly ridged and furrowed. 

THE POLE VARIETIES OF GARDEN BEANS 
The varieties of beans included under this class 
are united by only one character, expressed in the name 
of the group. This character, the ability to climb, is 
constant but does not allow separation of the varieties 
into this class until the plants are quite well along. 
The growth habit of the true pole beans is indeterminate, 
that of the true bush types is determinate. Differences 
in seed size, shape, and color; leaf size and shape; and 
flower color are not distinctive with either type when 
applied with the hope of establishing separatory charac- 
ters. 

The variability in plant characters of pole varieties 
covers a wider range than for the bush sorts. The stems 
range from wholly green, as in Georgian Pole, to nearly 



red, as in Scotia; foliage scanty, as in Kentucky Wonder, 
to abundant, as in Southern Prolific; flowers white to 
purple, pods short and small, as in Cutshort, to very 
large and broad, as in Caseknife. The color, size, and 
shape of seed of many varieties are quite individual. 
Seed of Cutshort, Lazy Wife, Missouri Wonder, Oregon 
Giant, and Scotia are notable examples of this. 

The utility of the pole beans is not markedly 
different from that of the dwarfs. Edible pods may be 
picked when quite young and free from fibre and parch- 
ment, or allowed to ripen until the young seeds become 
swollen but before the pod becomes dried. These are 
known as shell beans. Other varieties, especially those 
with white seed, are suitable for use as a dry bean when 
harvested after the pods and seed are fully mature. 

It is probable that pole beans were more commonly 
used fifty years ago than they are today. In New York 
and the eastern region of the country, pole beans are 
generally found only in home gardens ; in the South they 
are popular in home gardens and are also planted in the 
corn fields. In the Northwest, Oregon, Washington, 
Idaho, and Utah, pole varieties are considered a valuable 
market garden bean and also planted to some extent for 
the canning trade. In the central and southern portions 
of California, especially in the cooler coastal irrigated 
valleys, pole beans are quite extensively grown by 
market gardeners. For quality and yield they would 
seem to be very satisfactory. Possibly their lateness 
and the supports necessary are factors that limit their 
use. 

The varieties of pole beans with the possible excep- 
tion of those varieties which may be classed as Horti- 
cultural Beans have undergone less change than those 
of any other group. The relatively small number of 
varieties has apparently satisfied the requirements of 
the grower. It is of interest to note that in this group 
the green-podded varieties far outnumber the yellow- 
podded sorts. This is in direct contrast to the situation 
which exists in the bush varieties of garden beans. 
Among the older varieties of cultivated beans are 
Kentucky Wonder (1877), Caseknife (1820), Crease- 
back (1881), Cutshort (1835), and Golden Cluster 
(1806). These are variety names of pole beans listed 
since the date indicated but probably known as types 
for unknown ages of the past. They are still the most 
prominent in a long list of varieties. The following 
descriptions are further divided according to the color 
of the pod. 

GREEN PODS 

Advance. This bean originated with F. C. Heine- 
mann, Erfurt, Germany, sometime before 1900. It was 
introduced here in 1903 by Vaughn, and was tested on 
the U. S. Department of Agriculture plats in 1905 and 
1906. It differs from Caseknife in habit of growth in a 
very small way. Tracy found it small-vined, very early, 
and decidedly unproductive. 

Alpha. Refs. 90. The J. A. Everitt Seed Com- 
pany of Indianapolis introduced Alpha in 1896 as the 
" earliest pole bean in existence." It was said to mature 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



21 



as far North as bush beans, to be suitable for growth in 
corn, and to be similar in quality to Kentucky Wonder. 
Seeds rather flat, bright yellow, with darker eye-ring. 

Big Chief. This variety was originally listed by 
Buist in 1925, as Indian Chief, but in 1926 the name was 
changed to Big Chief, since Indian Chief had long been 
used as the name of an old wax podded variety. 

The pods are much like those of Refugee in very early stages, 
later more like those of Kentucky Wonder, nearly as long, fully as 
broad, often double-barrelled, S-curved, very short-tipped, brittle, 
stringless and of good quality. Seeds 10 to 12, crowded in pod, of 
medium size, about 85 to 90 to the ounce; broad oval or slightly 
kidney-shaped, not very plump, with short-rounded, or truncate 
ends, slightly dull black, not jet. 

Black Scimitar. Refs. 47, 56, 93, 94. This 
variety has been grown in America, so far as known, 
only in a test at the Missouri Botanical Garden; but 
it has been widely cultivated in Europe, where it was 
known to Martens in 1863. Vilmorin says the pods 
are noticeable for their large size and beauty, losing 
the purplish markings with age. White Zulu, a white- 
podded sub-variety is described among the wax-pod 
beans. 

Plant 4 to 5 feet tall, stout-stemmed; leaflets medium sized, 
pale green, considerably wrinkled. Flowers purplish. Pods green 
marked violet, 5 to 7 inches long, very broad, straight but twisting 
sidewise with short tip. Seeds very large, sometimes ?4 inch long, 
half as wide, kidney-shaped, plump, shining black. 

Black-Seeded Kentucky Wonder. Refs. 48, 91. 
Introduced toward the end of the last century (1899- 
1903) by McCullough, and apparently listed by only a 
few firms, this variety has many attractive qualities 
that would seem to merit greater popularity. Its pods 
are suitable for either snap or green-shell purposes. 
The pods show purplish in later stages and the seeds are 
black, showing color early. In season it is intermediate 
to late, 75 days at Geneva, this is 15 days later than the 
earliest sorts, such as Ideal, or Sickle; 10 days later than 
Kentucky Wonder or Caseknife; a few days later than 
Scotia; and the same in season as White Creaseback or 
Cutshort. This variety differs from Kentucky Wonder 
in color of seed, in having a much more vigorous vine, 
more foliage, later in season, greater productiveness, and 
in pods of much better quality; they being thicker and 
more meaty. The foliage is more abundant and the 
leaflets are less crumpled than those of Kentucky Wonder. 
In general vigor and hardiness it resembles Scotia. Of 
similar varieties Black Kentucky Wonder probably most 
resembles White's Prolific but is later in season and has 
larger, thicker, and more crease-backed pods. White's 
Prolific is similar to Missouri Wonder or Rhode Island 
Butter Pole. 

Plant a climber of large growth, 4 J i to 5 feet high with spread 
at base of plant of about 2} •> feet; very compact, extremely vigorous, 
of very long bearing period, and extremely productive; thick 
stemmed, many branches, which are green throughout in the 
younger stages but later the branches become somewhat reddish 
tinged. Foliage very abundant, dark green; leaflets very large, 
broad, flat smooth surface, occasionally somewhat crumpled, medium 
thick. Flowers white. 

Pods light green in color. Quality good, brittle, very fleshy, 
somewhat stringy, practically fiberless but rather coarse in texture. 
Size long, quite broad and moderately slender, (,7-9 x Jg x l /z inches), 



containing 7-9 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval to cordate through 
cross-section, fairly straight, slightly crease-backed, regular, not 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and rounded at the 
end. Spur short, thick and slightly recurved. Suture, placental is 
slightly indented and carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.45 x .75 x .55 cm. 1 80 per oz.), medium 
broad, flat sub-reniform, long ova! thru cross-section, flattened 
altho occasionally fairly plump; ends rounded. Hilum small and 
flat to slightly indented. Color shining jet black over the entire 
surface after a very light bloom has been removed. 

Blue-Podded Pole. Refs. 98. This variety was 
noticed in the United States at various times before it 
was grown at this Station in 1883, when it was said to be 
chiefly characterized by the dark purple color of the pods. 

Plant very vigorous, tall-climbing, medium late in season, 
and very productive of immense pods, 10 inches long, very broad 
and heavy and much swollen over beans, giving a very irregular 
profile from side or edge, somewhat curved, very short-tipped, 
completely stringless and fiberless, very strongly marked violet, 
which color rapidly disappears in cooking. Seeds rather large, 
broad, flat, kidney-shaped, often transversely bent, light brown or 
dun, faintly mottled with chocolate, evidently darkened down from 
the " rose-salmon streaked with grayish lilac " of Deanaiffe's seeds 
of " Cosses violettes," which were of the same shape, including 
the distortion. 

Bulgarian. Refs. 47. From the name this is 
supposedly of southeastern European origin. It was 
introduced into France in 1890, and grown in this 
country only at the Missouri Botanical Garden. Growth 
data and uses were not given by Irish; but Denaiffe 
commends the variety highly for its heavy, continuous 
production of beautiful pods of fair quality, but says 
it was rather late for northern or northeastern France 
although considered one of the best for the central 
section of the country. 

In Missouri: Plants 2-3 feet tall, climbing, but with few 
runners; leaflets small, light green, slightly wrinkled, quite thin. 
Flowers purplish. Pods 4 to 5 inches long, slightly curved, nearly 
1 i inch wide, sub-cylindrical, short-tipped, green blotched with 
purple. Seeds very large, half as wide as long, ovate oblong, 
slightly kidney-shaped, reddish brown or drab, striped and splashed 
drab. 

Burger Stringless. Refs. 48, 52, 76, 91. Syns. 
White-Seeded Kentucky Wonder. Vaughan in 1903 
introduced this variety as " new, one of the best pole 
beans, pods long, green, absolutely stringless; beans 
small, white, long, season." It is probably identical 
with Martens' Longhulsize Speckbohne, (Long-podded 
Bacon-bean) from which the variety McCaslan also 
came. Burger Stringless is probably of German origin 
and represents an old type of bean. While it was intro- 
duced into this country in 1903, it was not until 10 years 
later that it was used to any great extent, gradually 
increasing in popularity until in 1921 it was fisted under 
several names by about 75 seedsmen. The pods were 
ready to pick in 64 days, the same in season as Kentucky 
Wonder. In plant habit it also resembles Kentucky 
Wonder, with its scanty foliage, large leaflets, and short 
producing season. The pods are somewhat smoother 
and much less constricted between seeds. An improved 
strain, St. Louis Perfection White, was introduced in 
1927 by Ferry. 

Plant small for a pole bean, 4 ft. tall with very little spread at 
base; good climbing habit but rather lacking in vigor, open in habit, 



22 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



lightly productive with a short bearing period: stem slender: branches 
few and wholly green. Foliage scanty, dark grayish green; leaflets 
large, very broad, coarse, crumpled; 4'o inches long by 4 inches 
wide, quite generally rounded, widest near base, indented at stem, 
short abrupt tip. Flowers white. 

Pods dark, dull, silvery green in color. Quality excellent; 
very brittle and tender, fleshy, stringless, fiberless and of fine 
texture. Size long, fairly broad and fairly plump (6-7 J 4 xj^x ^ 
inches), containing 8-9 seeds per pod. Shape round, broad oval 
to nearly circular in cross-section, curved, crease backed, constricted, 
not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and rounded to 
somewhat truncate on the end. Spur short, medium slender and 
recurved. Suture, placental is indented and carpellary, rounded 
to obtuse. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.5 x .85 x .45 cm., (90-95 per oz.); 
broad reniform, flat, thin, long oval thru cross-section, indication or 
tendency towards a slight twist; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. 
Hilum small, flattened. Color white, faintly marked with grayish 
vein-like under pattern. 

Caseknife. Rets. 10, 12, 13, 15, 20, 28, 47, 48, 52, 
59, 63, 67, 68, 79, 91, 97, 98. Syns. Dutch Caseknife, 
White Case Knife, Case Knife Runner. This is one of 
the oldest known varieties in America, the name Case- 
knife and its many strains or synonyms, some of which 
undoubtedly deserve record as true varieties and others 
which differ but slightly from the type as grown today, 
have been noted in the literature since 1820. In the 
Country Gentleman of 1856 it was listed as a leading 
pole bean. Comparing it to some varieties which are in 
the same general group, we find Caseknife similar to 
Advance but later in season and more productive. White 
Soissons has larger seeds and very long, wrinkled pods. 
Liancourt seems to be intermediate between Caseknife 
and White Soissons, the pods being more curved, more 
swollen over beans, and more constricted than those of 
Caseknife, while the beans are longer, more plump, and 
little or not at all distorted, yet the dry seeds are not as 
plump nor as round at the ends as those of Soissons. 
As a shell bean Caseknife ranks in quality with Lazy 
Wife and Worcester Mammoth. Caseknife and Early 
Giant Advance are considered the flattest podded 
varieties under cultivation in this country. The variety 
is not of commercial value since it is a low yielder and 
the pods, which are tough and thin-walled, are not 
suitable as snap beans. It may be suitable for home use 
as a late green shell bean. In season it is early for a 
pole bean, the pods are ready in 65 days or pickable at 
the same time as Kentucky Wonder, 5 days earlier than 
McCaslan, 10 days earlier than Scotia and Cutshort, 
and nearly 20 days earlier than Lazy Wife. 

Plant of only medium growth, 4 to 4 ' ■> feet high with spread 
at base of 1 } ■> feet; climbs well, rather rank grower, twining rather 
loosely; stout stemmed, few branches, green thruout; vigor fair, 
moderately productive with short bearing period. Foliage scanty, 
medium to light green, crumpled, and wrinkled, slightly rough, 
rather thin and papery; leaflets large 4jg to 5' L > inches long, very 
broad )4 :i 4 inches 1 from very near base to one-third distance to tip, 
margins decidedly rounding, base indented at stem, tips small, 
abrupt. Flowers white. 

Pods light silvery green in color. Quality poor; stringy, 
fibrous, quite tough, slender, (7'j-9 x : '. v •* x {,— ' _. inches), 
containing 7-8 seeds per pod. Shape very flat, ovate-acuminate in 
cross-section, straight to somewhat curved, straight backed, some- 
what constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but not 
to the edge and rounded or sharply tapered at the end. Spur long, 



slender, and recurved. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, 
acute. 

Seeds very large, 1.7 x .9 x .5 cm., (75 per oz.) oblong reni- 
form, wide, flattened, when dry often irregular, twisted or curved, 
quite uniform and plump when green, ends rounded. Hilum 
small, slightly protuberant. Color, ivory white, thru which grayish 
veinlike marking appears over the entire surface; a very pale yellow- 
ish tinged, narrow eye-ring somewhat in evidence. 

Cherry Pole. Refs. 47, 56. This variety is 
known in America only through the Missouri Botanical 
Garden test of 30 years ago. It is considered inferior 
to Mont d'Or, which it resembles very closely. Irish 
says the plants were identical, the flowers rather lighter 
in color, and the seeds a little larger. Denaiffe thought 
it later than Mont d'Or with less fleshy pods which 
never become wholly yellow, and which were more 
stringy. Of the seeds described and illustrated by 
Denaiffe, those of Cherry were the smaller and more 
nearly circular. Mont d'Or is described with the wax- 
podded pole beans. 

Climbing French. Refs. 52. Syns. Climbing 
Canadian Wonder, Tender and True, Veitch's Climbing 
French. A climbing sport of the group of dwarf beans 
to which Canadian Wonder belongs. It is probably 
the most widely grown climbing French bean grown in 
England. The type has split up into minor forms, 
having seeds very much alike in color and size but 
differing in minor characters of foliage and pod. Many 
strains show plants with both green and yellow pods. 

Plant, branched, vigorous, 3 1 2 to 4 ' 2 feet high; foliage medium 
abundant. Flowers lilac. Pods 4 to 7 inches long, straight, flat, 
pale green or waxy yellow, with little string. Seeds large, long, 
kidney shape, shining purple. 

Cream Pole. Refs. 63. Farquhar sent this variety 
to the Kansas Station for trial in 1889, probably the 
same year of its introduction. It was carried for a 
few years by this firm, but never became well known. 
In the Kansas test it was late, but quite productive. 

Plant medium in size: leaflets medium to large, rather thick 
and coarse. Flowers violet. Pods 4 inches long, nearly straight, 
Jg-inch wide, flattened, light green, whitening later. Seeds 3 to 5, 
very large, rounding oval, flattened, greenish white at green-shell 
stage, when ripe, smooth, dun-colored with dark brown eye-ring. 

Creasebaek. Refs. 28, 48. 63, 91, 97. Syns. 
Earliest of All, Ewing Prolific Pole, Fat Horse, July 
Pole, Missouri White Cornfield, Mobile Pole, Straight 
Creasebaek, White Creasebaek. Martens describes, 
under a name which translated means " White Bean," a 
pole type which he considers the predecessor of Princess 
and which corresponds very closely to Creasebaek. He 
considers this identical with beans found among the 
upper Missouri River Indians by Prince Maximilian of 
Wied. This apparently confirms Tracy's statement that 
Creasebaek, which was brought to notice by Frotscher 
in 1881, had been grown in the South many years 
before this date. The extensive synonymy strengthens 
the presumption that the variety is very old, but probably 
originated in the United States. 

Tracy described two types; one very early and similar 
to Kentucky Wonder in having slow-growing, slender 
vines, small at first, and easily crowded out by the 
strong-growing plants of the other type, and a later 




MISSOURI WONDER 




CLIMBING FRENCH 





DUTCH CASE KNIFE 



POD TYPES OF POLE BEANS 



(First three natural size; last, five-sirths) 




TYPES OF GREEN PODDED POLE BEANS 



(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



23 



flatter-podded and inferior strain. He strongly recom- 
mended elimination of these inferior plants, but they 
appeared in some strains as grown at Geneva as late as 
1929 especially in a strain listed as Earliest of All. The 
stocks grown in 1930 were uniformly of the early or 
true type and the descriptions are from this growing. 
At Geneva, Creaseback was considered in the second 
early group with edible pods ready in from 68 to 72 
days or from 3 to 5 days later than Kentucky Wonder, 
3 days later than Caseknife, and 10 days later than 
Lazy Wife. The pods are very similar in size and shape 
to Scotia, lacking, however, the purple under-coloring. 
The plant in growth habit is not so open nor lacking in 
foliage as are the plants of Kentucky Wonder. The 
foliage appears much brighter, the vines more branched, 
and the leaflets less crumpled. 

Plant small, rather bushlike at early stages but climbing well 
later, compact at base of plant with little branching above. Vines 
4'j and more feet high with spread of 2 feet at base; vigor good, 
hardy, moderately productive, maturing all pods within a short 
period; slender stemmed, branches few, wholly green. Foliage 
medium abundant, dark green; surface smooth, somewhat crumpled, 
light veining, medium in thickness; most leaflets curled so that 
underside is cupshaped, medium to large, 4'j inches long by 3'i 
inches broad, regular in shape, widest nearer base, rounded to stem, 
straight taper to short tip. Flowers white. 

Pods dark dull green in color. Quality very good; very fleshy, 
quite stringless, not fibrous, brittle, and fine in texture. Size 
medium long, fairly broad and plump, 1 5—6 x ' 2 x n inches I, con- 
taining 6—8 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly circular in cross- 
section, straight to slightly curved, deeply crease-backed, regular, 
not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and rounded at 
the end. Spur short, slender and slightly curved. Suture, placental 
is indented and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. Seeds small to 
medium, 1.25 x .7 x .5 cm., (110-130 per oz. ); oval, sub-reniform, 
fairly plump to somewhat flattened; ends usually rounded, occa- 
sionally inclined to be truncate. Hilum small, flattened. Color 
ivory white, faintly marked with a veinlike under pattern. 

Curious Pole. This was grown from seed sent to 
Gregory, the sender stating that it originated as the 
result of a cross between Dwarf Horticultural and 
Dreer Lima, which cross Gregory believed impossible. 
He listed the variety in 1885 and it was grown at Geneva in 
1886. It was quite early (76 days from planting to edible 
podsj and averaged more than 40 pods to the plant. 

Cutshort. Refs. 13, 47, 63, 67, 68, 91. Syns. 
Cornfield Pole, Corn Hill Pole, Red Speckled, Red Cut 
Short, Red Speckled Oval Seeded. This type of pole 
bean was first known as early as 1835 under the name 
Corn Bean. Later it became known as Corn Hill 
and sometime during the early eighties as Cutshort. 
Cutshort thus is an old variety with many names; 
but it is doubtful whether the name Corn Bean, given by 
Tracy as the earliest one used for it, is more than a 
general name applying to other varieties as well; at 
least the Corn Bean described by Burr was too long- 
podded and its seeds too flat and too brown to be con- 
sidered identical with Cutshort. 

Cutshort as a name was unknown to Martens, but 
Burr's Corn Bean was probably Martens' Phaseolus 
gonospermus eostaneus. Cutshort would fall in the 
same group of truncated or angular beans, but could 
not be mistaken for any of the nine varieties included in 



this group by Martens. Irish's Corn Bean, in spite of 
some discrepancies in foliage and in seed color, is evi- 
dently Cutshort and not Burr's Corn Bean. 

Cutshort is largely a southern bean, rather too late 
for New York. In the South it can be grown in corn, 
and is valued mostly for the snap pods. Its productivity 
counter-balances the smallness of its pods and their lack 
of quality when past early stages. The pods are too 
small for market purposes. In 1901 Cutshort was listed 
129 times under 7 names in seedsmen's catalogs, in 
1906 and 1921 each 101 times, and in 1931 by 35 of the 
leading houses. Its season is intermediate to late, at 
Geneva 75 days, or 10 days later than Kentucky Wonder, 
Ideal Market, or Sickle, 3 to 5 days later than Scotia, 
and a week earlier than Lazy Wife. Cutshort does not 
resemble any other pole variety, the small-sized pods are 
quite similar to the pods of navy bean field type. The 
shape and color of the pods are similar to those char- 
acters in pods of Lazy Wife, but in size the pod is much 
smaller and the seed is red speckled instead of white. 
Plant medium to large in size, climbing well, loosely twining, 
4 to 5 feet tall with spread at base of about 2 ' ■> feet; vigor good, 
very productive over a long season; thick stemmed, moderately 
branched, wholly green. Foliage abundant, very dense at base of 
plant, medium to dark green, surface glossy, slightly crumpled, 
smooth, medium veining, thin; leaflets small to medium, 3 5 s by 3}£ 
inches wide, with longer laterals, widest very near bases which are 
almost straight along margin, sides gently curving to very obscure, 
but with pointed tips. Flowers white. 

Pods medium to dark green in color. Quality fair; quite 
brittle, fairly fleshy, slight amount of string and fine texture. Size 
short, broad and medium, quite plump, (3-4 x 3 s x ?s inches', 
containing 4-5 seeds per pod. Shape round, broad oval in cross- 
section, slightly curved, straight backed, slightly constricted, very 
crowded, quite smooth, filled to the tip and edge and abruptly 
rounded to truncate on the end. Spur short, medium stout and 
straight. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, obtuse to rounded. 
Seeds small, .9 x .8 x .5 cm., (105-110 per oz. I, generally 
quite variable in shape, however, most of them are rhomboidal, 
rather thin and flattened; ends truncate. Hilum large, flat. Color 
dingy gray (pallid purple drab) thru which reddish-gray (light 
vinaceous-gray) vein-like markings appear; dotted and splashed 
with purplish crimson (bordeaux) on hilar surface; prominent 
reddish brown, medium wide eye-ring present in all instances. 

Delicious Giant. This rather late introduction, 
1925, originated with Gill Bros, as a cross between 
Oregon Giant and Kentucky Wonder. It was earlier 
and more prolific than Oregon Giant and a decided 
improvement on that variety. This variety and Oregon 
Giant are quite unusual in size of pod clusters, size of 
pods, and in pod color. 

Pods like those of Oregon Giant, or even longer, more slender, 
almost round in cross-section, crease-backed, better filled by seeds 
more beautifully marked with red, and of a better quality. Seeds 
are of the size and shape of Kentucky Wonder, with grayish brown 
or medium brown ground color and more mottled than striped 
with numerous dark brown or black markings. 

Dwarf Lima. Refs. 63. This was listed by North- 
rup, Braslan Goodwin Co., about 1890, and tested at the 
Kansas Station. It was found to be neither dwarf nor 
a lima; but a pole bean of moderate height and vigor, 
somewhat like Cranberry Pole in habit, early, and 
productive. 

Foliage dark green; leaflets of medium size, broad, rough. 
Flowers white. Pods 5 to 7 inches long, nearly straight, ?s to 



24 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



% inch wide, green. Seeds 4 to 6, white when young, oval, between 
plump and flattened, taffy yellow, polished, indistinctly veined. 

Everbearing Stringless. This variety originated 
with Buckbee before 1913. It is said to be from a 
Kentucky Wonder X Lazy Wife cross, in general char- 
acters similar in every way to Kentucky Wonder except 
for color of seed which is white. 

Plant, climbing habit good, exceptionally early, producing 
clusters of dark green pods, 7 to 9 inches long, somewhat crease- 
backed, almost straight near stem, curved at tip, depressed between 
beans at green-shell stage, entirely stringless and containing 5 to 
7 white seeds, shelling easily. 

Georgian Pole. Refs. 100. The lateness in matur- 
ing pods of Georgian Pcle indicates an origin under 
southern conditions. H. G. Hastings introduced the 
variety in 1918 having secured the stock from a local 
dealer who had had some trade for it for some years 
back. Its true origin has never been definitely ascer- 
tained. As grown at Geneva it produced edible pods 
the last of September, but no ripe pods or dry seeds. 
Throughout the season the growth of the plants was 
very noticeable, the dark green foliage covering the 
trellis even under the worst drought conditions possible. 
The plants are resistant to drought and heat and also 
grow strongly when planted in corn in spite of the shad- 
ing. The pods are comparatively small, resembling pods 
of Ideal Market and Ward's Prolific but entirely green. 
The seeds are quite similar in color to those of Kentucky 
Wonder but smaller, plumper, and somewhat different 
in shape. 

Plant tall growing, 4 to 6 feet, climbing well, compact at 
base of plant and throughout; foliage dense, very dark, smooth, 
glossy; leaflets large, with terminals smaller than laterals, 4' 4 by 
4' 4 inches and 5 by 4 inches respectively in general shape like 
those of Kentucky Wonder but rather more rounded. Flowers 
white. 

Pods light green in color. Quality good; quite fleshy, almost 
stringless, fiberless, brittle, tender and fine in texture. Size medium 
long, moderately broad and fairly slender, l4 3 4-5 ] 4 x y^ x ^s 
inches!, containing 6-7 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross- 
section, straight, slightly crease-backed, regular, fairly crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge and tapering at the end. Spur 
short, stout, and curved to occasionally recurved. Suture, placental 
is flattened to somewhat rounded and carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds small, 1.2 x .65 x .5 cm., (115-120 per oz.); short oval, 
somewhat flattened; ends round. Hilum small, flattened. Color 
brown drab drab I to grayish brown hair brown) of varying 
intensity over the entire surface, marked with a dark, reddish 
brown, narrow eye-ring. 

Holstein. Whether one or two varieties are 
included under this name is unknown. Seeds of the 
" Holsteiner Bohne " were received at this Station from 
Germany, and grown in 1883. The name would imply 
that the seeds were white and black, these being the 
color of Holstein-Friesian cattle. Buckbee listed the 
Holstein pole bean as " my own introduction " in 1894, 
but does not claim origination; so it is probably the 
same as the " Holsteiner Bohne." It was said to be 
the earliest pole bean, which the Station data practically 
confirms, only one other variety, Orleans Red, produc- 
ing earlier pods. At the Michigan Station the beans 
were said to be " peculiarly marked red and white." 

Ideal .Market. Syns. Black Creaseback. This 
was originally introduced in 1914 as Black Creaseback 



by Van Antwerp's Seed Store of Mobile, Alabama. A 
local farmer had noticed in a planting of White Crease- 
back a single plant different in growth and with black 
seeds. When planted the next year it came true and 
was considered as a new variety. In 1924 it was rein- 
troduced by Chris Reuter Seed Co. of New Orleans as 
Reuter's Ideal Market under which name it is now 
generally cataloged. It is rapidly gaining popularity 
as a valuable early and productive small-podded pole 
bean, very hardy and vigorous. As grown here and as 
seen in eastern trial grounds, it is fully a week earlier 
than any other pole bean; nearly two weeks ahead of 
Kentucky Wonder and Scotia. The pods are very 
similar in appearance to those of Refugee with inch 
marks when pods are well swollen. 

Plant is of moderate height, 3 to 3J^ feet tall, spread at base of 
1 ] 2 feet, compact growth, stems marked reddish, branches few. 
Foliage scanty, light to medium green, rather fine; leaves rough, 
crumpled, medium veining, slight pubescence, thick. Flowers 
phlox purple with noticeably long wings. Pods light silvery green 
in color. Quality excellent; fleshy, brittle, tender, stringless, fiber- 
less and fine in texture. Size moderately long, rather narrow and 
quite plump, i5-5'_> x ? s — i'2 x '2 inches 1, containing 5-6 seeds per 
pod. Shape round, broad ovate to cordate in cross-section, straight 
to moderately curved, creasebacked, regular, not crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip and edge and rounded at the end. Spur short, 
thick and moderately straight. Suture, placental is slightly indented 
and carpellary, obtuse. Seeds small, 1.1 x .5 x .4 cm. 1140 per oz. 1; 
oblong, oval, occasionally sub-reniform, moderately plump to some- 
what flattened, oval in cross-section; ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum medium, flattened to slightly indented. Color, shining jet 
black over the entire surface. 

Intestin. Refs. 47, 93, 94. Intestin was grown 
at this Station in 1883, and was also described by Irish. 
It is an old French variety originating with Mons. 
Perrier of Bathie, and has never been commercially 
grown in America. Denaiffe confused it with Crease- 
back, which it somewhat resembles in pods, although 
Intestin pods are much shorter and more like those of 
Lazy Wife. The seeds, by their kidney-shape and dis- 
tortion, with the eye not central, are more like those of 
McCasland, but thicker. 

Japan. Refs. 47, 93, 94. The only record of this 
variety in America is in the tests at the Missouri Botani- 
cal Garden previous to 1901. It had been grown in 
France for some time but was losing in popularity because 
of the better quality of the newer varieties. 

Plant 4-5 feet tall with strong stem and few runners. Foliage 
abundant, light green, wrinkled, thick; leaflets as broad as long, 
small. Flowers purplish. Pods 4 to 6 inches long, more than 
1 j inch wide, flat, much curved, with short, slender, curved tips, 
much waved along ventral edge, fiberless, green during edible 
stage, then yellow. Seeds very large, nearly 3 4 -inch long, two- 
thirds as wide, very broad kidney-shaped, very flat, sometimes 
slightly contorted, coffee brown. 

Java. Refs. 47. This variety like the preceding 
is known only through the trials at the Missouri 
Botanical Garden. It was thought to have been intro- 
duced from Java, first into Germany and later into 
France and England. 

Plant smaller than Japan, more viny, with straighter, rounder, 
more attractive pods, without strings or fiber until beans are well 
formed, fleshy and tender. Seeds smaller than those of Japan, 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



25 



proportionately narrower and with ends more unequal. Color 
yellowish brown, with darker eye-ring. 

Jordan Self-Drier. Dr. Jordan of southeastern 
Pennsylvania obtained seed of a pole bean from a 
German farmer near Schellsburg, Bedford Co., Pa., 
about 1921. After several years' trial it was introduced 
by Schell. It continues to be listed only by the intro- 
ducer and is too late in season to be of much value in the 
North. The introducer states the pods are so stringless 
and fiberless that the dried pods can be utilized during 
the winter as a substitute for snap beans. The green 
shell beans are too small for general favor, but the dry 
beans are excellent. 

Plants vigorous, dark green, productive, very much like 
Lazy Wife, but much later, with broader, rather shorter pods, 
broad-oval in cross-section, slightly curved and sometimes curved 
forward instead of backward. Seeds almost perfectly globular, 
with very glossy surface, often decidedly wrinkled, ivory white, 
about 80 to the ounce. 

Kentucky Wonder. Refs. 11, 29, 36, 47, 48, 52, 

58. 59, 67, 68, 77, 85, 91, 97, 98, 99. Syns. American 
Sickle Pole, Eastern Wonder, Egg Harbor, Georgia 
Monstrous Pole, Improved Southern Prolific, Missouri 
Prolific, Old Homestead Pole, Texas Pole. This most 
popular pole variety has probably been grown in the 
South for three-quarters of a century, but was first 
mentioned in the Country Gentleman of 1864 under 
the name of Texas Pole which is one of its present-day 
synonyms. James J. H. Gregory & Sons introduced 
the name Kentucky Wonder in 1877 and as such or as 
one of its numerous synonyms it has been by far the 
most popular pole bean grown. In 1901 it was found 
listed 214 times in trade lists and 20 years later 287 times 
under 27 different names or nomenclatural combinations. 
Kentucky Wonder as a type was unknown to 
Martens, although he received seeds of many other 
Southern pole beans. It does not appear in available 
German catalogs, but has been grown and described 
in both England and France. The name which this 
variety enjoys and its early introduction have given 
Kentucky Wonder a standing that has become a " habit " 
to home gardeners. The performance of the variety 
merits this popularity for it is relatively early, hardy, 
of good productivity over a rather short season, and has 
large, fleshy, stringless, fiberless pods of excellent flavor. 
In season it belongs in the early group, the first pods 
being ready in 64 days at Geneva. The pods of Ken- 
tucky Wonder are easily identified by the peculiarly 
wrinkled surface and their great length. This wrinkling 
of surface is also a characteristic of Tennessee Wonder, 
but the pods of this variety are larger and show a purplish 
tinge and the seeds instead of a solid brown color are 
slate gray with strips of black olive. 

Plant small to medium in size; 4} i feet or more tall with 
spread of about 1?4 feet at base; of good climbing habit but rather 
open in growth; vigor not more than moderate, rather short bearing 
period and yield only fair. Stem slender, internodes long; branches 
few, green thruout. Foliage scanty, dark green, dull, rough, 
crumpled, medium veining, of medium thickness; leaflets 3?4 inches 
long by 3 J 4 inches wide, greatest width near base or one-fourth the 
distance from it, laterals very one-sided, margins curving smoothly 
to bases but almost straight to short, obscure tips. Flowers white. 



Pods light silvery green in color. Quality good; slightly 
stringy, fiberless, brittle, tender, and of rather coarse texture. 
Size long, broad and plump, |7 9 x ' j x :i s ",s inches), and contain- 
ing 8-10 seeds per pod. Shape round broad oval, much curved, 
somewhat S-shaped, crease-backed, constricted, not crowded, 
wrinkled, rough, filled to the tip and edge, and blunt to somewhat 
rounded end. Spur short, medium slender, slightly curved. 

Seeds medium 1.6 x .65 x .5 cm., (80-85 per oz.), broad oblong, 
occasionally somewhat reniform, somewhat flattened; long oval in 
cross-section; ends rounded. Hilum medium large, slightly indented. 
Color buffy brown (saccardo's umber) marked with very indistinct 
vein-like pattern of a darker shade over the entire surface; dark red 
to mahogany brown (burnt sienna) narrow eye-ring present in all 
cases. 

Lazy Wife. Refs. 32, 47, 48, 52, 56, 59, 63, 91, 

93, 94, 97, 98. Syns. White Cranberry, Sophie, Mary- 
land White Pole, White Cherry. Maule in 1894 says 
Lazy Wife originated in Bucks Co., Pa., but it was 
probably brought there by German settlers. When 
comparison is possible it corresponds in every way with 
Martens Sophie bean, which he says was noted by Savi 
in 1822 as San Domingo bean; and Tracy says the 
variety was known in America as early as 1810 as White 
Cherry Pole or White Cranberry Pole. In France the 
type is known as Coco Blanc. Irish describes Sophie 
but evidently this was only a semi-climbing type. Its 
maximum height is given as from 3 to 4 feet. It is of 
equal value in the home garden as a snap or green shell 
bean and is also a good late variety for the market. 
At Geneva it produced its pods very late, 80 days from 
time of planting, about the same in season as Ward's 
Prolific and about one week later than Southern Corn- 
field and one week earlier than Georgian Pole. As a 
late snap pole bean it is excelled in quality by Scotia 
and Black-Seeded Kentucky Wonder, but as a shell 
bean it is probably unsurpassed. 

Plant large, 4 J 2 feet tall and more with spread at base of 
plant of 1?4 feet; noticeably a poor climber while getting started 
but later often classed as a rank grower, compact, moderately 
vigorous, of long bearing period, productive; thick stemmed, much 
branched, wholly green. Foliage very abundant, medium green; 
leaf surface, glossy, smooth, crumpled, thick; leaflets large, more 
than 5 inches long, 3J^ to 4 inches wide at about one-fourth the 
distance from the base, well rounded to stem, straight sided, taper- 
ing to medium long tip. Flowers white. 

Pods dark to medium, glossy green in color. Quality good; 
fairly fleshy, stringless, almost fiberless, brittle and fine in texture. 
Size medium to long, broad and slender, (5 1 3-6 x 5g~ 3 4. x ?s inches), 
containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape flat, ovate-acute in cross- 
section, straight to very slightly curved, straight backed, much 
constricted, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and abruptly rounded 
on the end. Spur long, medium slender, somewhat tapering, and 
straight. Suture placental is flat and carpellary decidedly acute. 
Seeds small, 1.1 x .9 x .8 cm., (70-80 per oz. I; spheroidal, very 
thick, nearly cylindrical in cross-section, very plump; ends well 
rounded. Hilum small, rounded. Color ivory white, marked with 
a distinct, grayish, vein-like under pattern over the entire surface. 

McCaslan. Refs. 52. This variety was for many 
years in the possession of the McCasland family in 
Georgia and on the death of Mr. McCasland the stock 
seed was turned over to Hastings who first offered 
seed for sale in 1912. This variety is grown chiefly 
in the South where popular usage has shortened the name 
to McCaslan. Apparently it is an earlier type of 



26 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Burger Stringless, more productive, and with pods that 
are natter and more twisted. 

Plant similar to Burger Stringless in all plant characters. 
Pods dark green in color. Quality fair; fairly brittle and tender, 
some stringiness, small amount of fiber, good flavor but rather 
coarse in texture. Size long, broad and slender, (7-8 x ^ x -^ inches), 
containing 7-8 seeds per pod. Shape flat, cordate to long ovate in 
cross-section, irregularly curved, straight backed, slightly constricted, 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge and rounded 
to blunt on the end. Spur short, medium thick and straight. 
Suture, placental flattened to slightly indented and carpellary, 
acute. Seeds medium, 1.7 x .85 x .5 cm., (80-85 per oz.), somewhat 
smaller than seed of Dutch Caseknife; oblong, reniform, flattened 
and inclined to be somewhat twisted, altho not as much so as the 
above named variety: ends rounded. Hilum small, flattened. 
Color ivory white, thru which a grayish vein-like under pattern is 
apparent over the entire surface. 

Marshall. Refs. 97, 98. Thorburn's catalog of 
1882 lists this variety. It was grown at Geneva that 
year. The record indicates that it was exceedingly late 
and the most productive in weight of beans of any 
variety tested. As only the ripe pods are described, it 
was undoubtedly a variety suitable only for the green 
shell and dried beans. 

Plant tall, with abundant, rather dark green foliage, large" 
broadly ovate leaflets, inclining to triangular, taper-pointed. Pods' 
6'_. to 7 inches long, much swollen and wrinkled, sabre-fornr 
somewhat flattened, parchment like, light dun yellow. Seeds 4 to 5> 
oblong, very broad, kidney shaped, quite strongly flattened side- 
wise, rarely compressed at the ends, more than ' > inch long, two- 
thirds as wide, rather more than one-third as thick, pale dun yellow, 
striped with brighter yellow in rings concentric about the eye, with 
dark, reddish brown eye-ring. 

Missouri Wonder. Refs. 13, 48, 91. Syns. Nancy 
D., Noxall, Prolific Green Pod, Rhode Island Butter, 
White's Prolific Pole. The original form of this bean 
is quite unknown. The evidence now available indicates 
its synonomy with those varieties mentioned above and 
possibly also with still another variety known nearly 
50 years ago (Ferry catalog 1889j as Rhode Island 
Creaseback. Rhode Island Butter Pole is a name listed 
by seedsmen at least since 1867 and is considered the 
oldest of the names mentioned, since it was grown for 
many years previous to its being listed. White's Prolific 
Pole by some is said to have been known as early as 
1850 and to have originated either as a renamed Rhode 
Island Butter or as a southern variety coming from 
Fulton S. White of Birmingham, Alabama. These two 
varieties were considered identical. Evidently this 
type gradually passed from popular use for at the 
beginning of the century we find it reintroduced under 
different names. Wm. Henry Maule in 1901 offered 
New Prolific Green Pod Pole which was renamed Noxall 
the next year after a prize name contest won by Mr. 
W. C. Richards of Carleton, Michigan. At that time 
it was stated that the variety had been grown by one 
family for a period of 60 years. About this same 
period the name Missouri Wonder became identified 
with a type grown in the middle west. Henry Field 
was one of the first to list it under this name. In his 
catalog of 1907 nearly one entire page was devoted to 
extolling its merits. Nancy D, another name for the 
variety, is of more recent origin, coming from Ferry in 



1924. The original stock came from Mrs. Nancy Davis 
of Hazard, Kentucky. She asked that it be called 
Nancy Davis. However, since Scotia or Striped Crease- 
back is now offered by some under the name Nancy 
Davis, Ferry, to avoid confusion, called the variety 
simply Nancy D. Three of these names, Missouri 
Wonder, Noxall, and Nancy D. were listed in 1931, 
and we have chosen the name Missouri Wonder. 

Under Geneva conditions it proved to be an excel- 
lent sort with vines productive of pods especially suit- 
able for use for the green shelled beans. The same in 
season as Kentucky Wonder or McCaslan, one week 
earlier than Scotia. 

Plant large, climbing well, branched, green throughout. 
Leaflets small to medium, rather dark, broad, crumpled, rough 
surface. Flowers white. 

Pods medium green in color, lighter than Kentucky Wonder. 
Quality poor, tough, stringy, quite fibrous but medium fine in 
texture. Size medium to long, moderately wide and very plump 
'5 1 j-6 x ' j x : .-' j inches!, containing 6—7 seeds per pod. Shape 
round, cordate thru cross-section, curved, creasebacked, occasionally 
straight backed, moderately constricted, not crowded, smooth, 
filled to the edge but not to the tip and rounded at the end. Spur 
long, slender and slightly curved. Suture placental is indented and 
carpellary obtuse. 

Seeds large, 1.7 x .9 x .6 cm. (65-70 per oz.). Shape oblong 
sub-reniform, sometimes much shorter, usually plump, occasionally 
somewhat flattened, oval to moderately broad oval thru cross- 
section. Ends usually irregular, not truly truncate, occasionally 
rounded and often wedge-shaped — not very uniform. Hilum 
small flattened, sometimes very slightly depressed. Color pale 
pinkish cinnamon) tinged with i vinaceous-grey ) to form a finely 
mottled undercolor, splashed irregularly over the entire surface 
with a drab (critrine-drabj and marked with a distinct, moderately 
broad, two-toned color eye-ring, the inner portion of deep orange 
brown (tawny) shading toward the outer portion with a tawny 
yellow (deep chrome). 

Mottled Prolific. This is probably the original 
type from which Tennessee Wonder came, or an 
unnamed closely related strain later introduced as Tenn- 
essee Wonder or Striped Sickle. It differs from these 
varieties in much shorter pods, about 4 J •_> inches long, 
borne usually in pairs only, and in more flattened seeds 
often with truncated ends. It was very productive but 
late and the young pods were tender and of fine quality. 

Olathe Prolific. This variety is known to us only 
through its listing by Northrup in 1893 as a new pole 
bean, and described as a new climber, very early, with 
fleshy, stringless pods 7 to 8 inches long, each with six 
or seven large, flat kidney-shaped beans, white with 
brownish or metallic spot or stripe. 

Oregon Giant. Syns. Dickenson's Yount, Moth- 
er's Favorite, Routledge Giant. This bean of western 
origin has been known for some time and is very popular 
in the Pacific Northwest. The pods in our tests have 
been larger than pods of most pole varieties and were 
produced in abundance and fairly early. 

Plants not specially characteristic but leaflets decidedly long 
for pole beans, especially the laterals which are very one-sided. 
Flowers pink, well distributed over the vines. Pods 8 ' _• to 9 ' 2 
inches long, curved in S-shape, ' ., to :1 4 inch wide, cordate-ovate 
in cross-section, rather thin-walled, inflated, constructed between 
beans, not filled to the edge by the beans, somewhat tough, stringy, 
coarse-textured, of only fair quality, very light, waxy green, strik- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



27 



ingly marked brownish purple. Seeds 7 or 8, rather like those of 
Tennessee Wonder, hut with lighter, more pinkish or light brown 
ground color and with broken rather than continuous black lines, 
dashes and spots of black, large, broad-kidney shaped, ' _. inch or 
more in length, plump to slightly flattened, about 50 to the ounce. 

Pale Dim Runner. Refs. 97, 98. The time when 
this bean first came into use is unknown. It is now 
impossible to distinguish present types or strains referred 
to as " dun-colored " with similarly named varieties 
mentioned in early bean literature. The variety was 
grown at this Station in 1882 and found to be very 
late and much better in productivity than other green- 
shell pole beans, although in this respect it was not 
equal to Marshall. 

Plant very vigorous and tall -growing; foliage abundant; 
leaflets large, broad-ovate inclining to lozenge-shaped, moderately 
taper-pointed. Pods 5 to 5 ' _> inches long, straight or nearly so, 
with medium length, slender tips, swollen by beans, wrinkled, pale 
dun color splashed with violet. Seeds usually 5, nearly ] ■> inch long, 
three-fourths as wide, two-thirds as thick, approaching globular, 
occasionally truncate, with eye more or less protuberant, polished, 
shining pale dun or light brown, with bright yellow eye-ring. 

Phenomenon. This bean was first introduced 
into this country by Vaughan in 1913, but the variety 
originated about 1905 in Germany with J. C. Schmidt. 
From fragmentary descriptions it appears to have been 
much like McCaslan. 

Pods long (7H to 9 ! L i inches), fiat round, sometimes with 
flat-podded rogues, almost straight, very fleshy, smooth-surfaced, 
swollen over beans, more or less stringy when old, but not fibrous. 
Seeds of medium size, white. 

Powell Prolific. Refs. 48, 91. This variety origi- 
nated with E. P. Powell of North Carolina, and was 
introduced in 1887 by A. T. Cook. It is a very late 
variety, producing its slender, curved, short pods in 
clusters scattered thickly over the compact, vigorous 
vines. 

Plant, vines heavy, of moderate height, climbing well. Flowers 
lilac. Pods 4 ' 2 to 5 ' 2 inches long, straight for two-thirds length 
from stem, then curving gently to rounded ends with very short 
tips, very broad oval or circular in cross-section, 5 g inch or more in 
diameter, with flat dorsum, fleshy and thick-walled, but rather 
tough, stringy, not fibrous, coarse-textured, poor in quality, light- 
green with purplish shading. Seeds 8 or 9, crowded in pods, about 
?s inch long, nearly half as wide, short oblong with very short- 
rounded often truncate ends, quite plump, deep dull black, about 
150 to the ounce. 

Predome. Refs. 13, 32, 47, 52, 93, 94. Syns. 
Prudhomme, Prodommet. At one time Predome was 
grown in the United States in a limited way, being 
described by both Burr and Irish but not by Tracy 
or Jarvis. This pole bean has long been very popular 
in France, where it is still listed and highly recommended, 
and was considerably used in England as late as 1919. 
In many respects the variety is perhaps most like 
Princess but with fleshy pods exceedingly like those of 
Lazy Wife, though not quite so thick and with tip 
extending on dorsal edge rather than from center. 

Plant climbing, 5 to 6 feet moderately vigorous, stem slender. 
Foliage medium abundant to scanty; light green, leaflets small 
2 to 2 ' 2 inches long and from lj^ to 1 3 4 inches wide, thin, wrinkled. 
Flowers, white. Pods green, tender, brittle, slightly stringy, 
fiberless, good quality, slightly flat, short, 3 to 4 inches long, J^ inch 



broad, straight, spur short, thick. Seed slightly flattened, sub- 
truncate, white. 

Princess. Refs. 13, 47, 52, 56, 93. In Europe 
this variety was widely grown during the first half of 
the last century. It was known to Martens and was 
described by Burr. In the United States it was tested 
at the Missouri Botanical Garden, but it never was used 
as a commercial sort. The name was used by Tracy as a 
synonym of Caseknife, but that variety and the one 
here described differ greatly. It is still in use, especially 
in French Islands, Belgium, and Holland. Princess is 
a midseason variety, very productive, and most com- 
monly used for the green shell and dry beans. 

Princess differs from Predome in pods which are 
longer and with seeds more separate in the pods. The 
seeds when dry are larger and of a brighter whiteness. 
There is also a subvariety known as Long Podded 
Princess with seeds even more separated in the pods. 

Plants about 6 feet tall, moderately vigorous, climbing well; 
foliage rather scanty, light yellowish green; leaflets small, wrinkled, 
thin. Flowers white. Pods green, 4 to 4 ' 2 inches long, nearly 
straight, with long-rounded ends and short tips, not quite } 2 inch 
wide, sub-cylindrical, swollen over beans and constricted between 
them, without string or fiber but hardly fleshy enough for good 
snaps, green, slightly yellow near maturity. Seeds 6 or 7, some- 
times more, not touching in pods, plump ovoid, about 3 g inch long, 
li inch or more wide, very plump, with well rounded ends, white. 

Princess Rose. Refs. 98. The only record of this 
bean is through a test at this Station in 1883 in which it 
was found to be a rather late, fairly productive variety 
suitable for use for the snap beans only. 

Plant climbing, but only 3 feet tall, slender-stemmed and 
sparingly branched, with light green pods. Seeds small, nearly 
globular, very slightly longer than broad, occasionally slightly 
compressed on the ends, shining light reddish brown with brown 
eye-ring. 

Purple Pod. Refs. 47, 93, 94. This variety was 
grown at the Missouri Botanical Garden and considered 
by Irish to be the French variety described previously 
as Blue Podded Pole; but his description of the purplish 
color of the foliage stems, leaf-stalks, and flowers, and 
the shape of the seed and its light color make it almost 
positive that Purple Pod is Martens' Lucas Bean, a 
newer sub-variety of the " Cosses Violettes " of Vilmorin 
and other French authorities, rather than the old variety 
which had been known in America since 1859. The 
Lucas bean was found in possession of a neighboring 
gardener by Dr. E. Lucas, Reutlingen, Germany, in 
1863. Aside from the rather deeper violet color, 
beginning on the sunny side of nodes and extending to 
flower stalks, all parts of flowers, and to the pods as 
soon as they are well formed, which coloration makes the 
variety a curiosity, the Purple Pod or Lucas bean was 
no better than Blue Pod, although both varieties produce 
in late mid-season heavy crops of large, much swollen, 
fleshy pods, practically stringless and fiberless, and of 
good quality. 

The seeds of Purple Pod are described by Irish as of " various 
shades of yellowish green, with dark ring around the hilum, more 
than ' 2 inch long, irregularly flattened, often with truncated ends, 
slightly kidney-shaped;" while Martens gives color as flesh colored 
with gray veining, and shape -3 inch long, more than half as wide, 
one-third as thick, flat kidney-shaped. 



28 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Queen of France. In France and Germany and 
at the Missouri Botanical Garden, this variety is a true 
pole bean, an excellent semi-late variety, very productive 
of pods practically free from string and fiber. The exact 
origin is unknown, but it has been grown in France for 
more than 50 years. There is some uncertainty as to 
whether a true dwarf form of Queen of France exists. 
Exceptional weather and soil conditions possibly account 
for the dwarfing of the plants grown at Geneva in 1889. 

The pods resemble those of Zulu, long, heavy, semi-round, 
much swollen over beans and constricted between them; light green 
changing to light yellow and then white occasionally shaded with 
violet. Seeds in shape and markings are similar to very broad 
Dwarf Golden Carmines but with ashy gray or coffee brown ground 
color and black " Zebra " stripes. 

Rod Orleans. Refs. 13. Burr describes Red 
Orleans as quite prolific of pods, suitable for soups and 
stews. 

Plant of medium height. Flowers white. Pods sickle 
shaped, about 5 inches long, tinged red as they mature and becoming 
yellow. Seeds 5 or 6, oblong, often squarely or diagonally trun- 
cate, ? _> inch long, three-fifths as wide, plump, bright blood red when 
harvested, soon becoming brownish red. 

Rice. Refs. 32, 47, 56, 93, 94. Syn. Haricot Riz. 
Rice was grown at the Missouri Botanical Garden but 
seems not otherwise known in the United States, the 
Rice as described by Burr being a variety known as 
Dwarf White Rice, which variety was also grown by 
Irish. This bean was considered too tender for England 
except when grown next to a warm south wall for 
protection. In season it was late, although moderately 
productive and tender podded; its chief use is for the 
small white dry beans. 

Plant 4 to 6 feet tall, climbing but rather weak-growing, 
allowing pods to touch the soil; thin, smooth leaflets, 2 to 2j:j inches 
by 1/4 to 2 inches. Pods 2 to 3 inches, sub-cylindrical, slightly 
curved, with short-curved tips, light green. Seeds 5 or 6, small, 
Jj inch long or slightly more, nearly as broad, only slightly flattened, 
rounded or slightly truncate at ends, dingy, yellowish white. 

Rocky Mountain. Refs. 46. A variety which 
appears to be known only by test at Geneva in 1890. 
The descriptions are very incomplete and without 
reference to its origin or time of introduction. 

Plant 6 to 7 feet tall; very early in season. Foliage light 
green. Pods curved and very much wrinkled. Seeds ? 4 ' inch long, 
smooth surfaced, dun colored. 

Ronceray. Refs. 46. Vilmorin, in 1890, was the 
introducer of this variety which in its principal vegeta- 
tive characters approaches rather closely Haricot Dwarf 
Soissons Vert. Whether or not it is a running type of 
the dwarf form is unknown. At first very popular 
it soon lost ground and was dropped from lists after 
about 15 years. In the trial at Geneva in 1891 it was 
considered of great merit as a snap bean, with broad pods 
of good length, produced over a long season. 

Plant late, moderately productive. Pods 4 1 ■> to 6 inches long, 
nearly ? , inch wide, considerably flattened, straight or slightly 
curved, crisp when young, fibrous and stringy when old, green to 
maturity. Seeds 6 or 7, more than J ■'< inch long, and more than 
half as wide, kidney-shaped, flattened, greenish white. 

Royal Corn. Refs. 48, 91. Livingston intro- 
duced this variety in 1898 and carried it for more than 



10 years, although only one or two other seedsmen 
listed it. The plant in growth habit was very similar 
to White Sickle, but earlier, more productive, and 
with flatter pods that were much curved or sometimes 
twisted; quality poor, stringy; seeds slightly shorter, 
broader, more kidney-shaped. 

Scotia. Refs. 48, 58, 77, 91. Syns. Daisy Bell, 
Genuine Cornfield, Nancy Davis, Nancy Davis Corn- 
field, Striped Creaseback. The Scotia type of zebra- 
banded bean seed was known to Martens who had 
received seed from Louisiana through Duke Paul of 
Wurttemburg, and the type was also known to Savi 
who published a classification of beans in 1822. Scotia 
was first brought to general notice in this country in 
1892 by Joseph Harris who had secured the seed from 
a customer in eastern New York who recommended the 
variety very highly. In the trials it proved to be a good 
late pole variety for either home or market use, the pods 
remaining in edible condition for a long period. The 
first pods were ready for picking in 72 days at Geneva. 
This was 10 days later than Kentucky Wonder, about 
the same time as Black-Seeded Kentucky Wonder, and 
a few days earlier than Cut Short and White Crease- 
back. Scotia is very similar in general growth habit 
and utility to Black-Seeded Kentucky Wonder, although 
since the pods are slightly stringy it is not quite as good 
in quality. The original strain as first introduced had 
pods which were stringless but this quality is lacking 
in most existing strains. The pods are similar in 
shape to pods of White Creaseback but differ in having 
purple coloring as they mature. 

Plant large, 43 2 feet tall, with spread of two feet at base 
of plant; good climbing habit, compact growth, vigorous, very 
long in bearing, very heavily productive; stem heavy, thick, branches 
many, stems usually a reddish brown. Foliage abundant, dark 
green, smooth surface, slightly crumpled, medium in thickness; 
medium in size, 4 inches long by 3 inches wide, terminal leaflet 
rounded, side leaflets nearly triangular to broad ovate, taperpointed 
to short blunt tip. Flowers phlox purple. 

Pods medium dark green, often shaded with purplish brown in 
later stages. Quality good; fairly brittle, fleshy, quite stringy, 
small amount of fiber and of very fine texture. Size long, narrow, 
and quite plump, (6-7 x ys x ? 8 inches), containing 8-9 seeds per pod. 
Shape round, nearly circular in cross-section, straight, crease backed, 
regular, fairly well crowded, filled to the tip and edge, and rounded 
at the end. Spur short, slender, and curved, occasionally recurved 
slightly. Suture, placental is slightly indented and carpellary, 
obtuse. 

Seeds small to medium, 1.3 x .7 x .5 cm., (100-105 per oz.) 
oblong to slightly sub-reniform, somewhat flattened, long oval in 
cross-section; ends rounded. Hilum medium, somewhat indented. 
Color grayish buff brown (tilleul-buff ) under color, mottled 
with pinkish brown (light brownish vinaceousl over entire surface 
except for an occasional black stripe or two usually on the dorsal 
surface altho it may occur on the placental suture to some extent; 
prominent yellow drab narrow eye-ring always present. 

Sou thorn Prolific. Refs. 14, 15, 28, 36, 47, 48, 
63, 79, 96, 97, 98. Syns. Haricot Don Carlos, Monster 
Podded Southern Prolific, Willing's Pride. Landreth 
listed Southern Prolific about 1872, but it was undoubt- 
edly grown in the South before that date. According 
to Tracy, it originally bore short, fleshy pods of high 
quality, and was widely grown about 1880 and highly 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



29 



prized. In France and Germany Southern Prolific was 
known as Don Carlos and considered a very vigorous 
grower with pods fleshy and very tender. Soon after 
1900 the variety began to degenerate or similar seed of 
other varieties or strains became mixed with the true 
stock, so that at the beginning of this century it had 
become almost wholly of two types, both different from 
the old variety, and greatly inferior to it. 

Plant large, good climber, thick stemmed, often purplish 
at nodes; foliage abundant, dark green; leaflets small to medium, 
smooth, thin. Flowers white. Pods, the old, valuable type had 
slightly curved pods about 4?-4 or 5 inches long, very blunt-ended 
and with very short tips, decidedly oblate and indented on both 
ventrum and dorsum, so fleshy that only slight constrictions showed 
between the beans, brittle and excellent as snaps. The undesirable 
types were two, — one short-podded, of about the same length as 
the desirable type, but with more pointed ends and longer tips, 
thin-walled and much constricted between the beans, stringy and 
fibrous, of very poor quality; the second type had flat, very evenly 
curved pods, one-third to nearly one-half longer than the short- 
podded ones, with long-pointed ends and long tips, somewhat zig- 
zagged by swellings on opposite sides of pod over alternate beans, 
narrow oval in cross-section, not fleshy, stringy, fibrous and of 
poor quality. 

Seeds small, about 135 to the ounce, short broad-oval, about 
J i inch long, very rarely } 2 inch, more than half as wide, with very 
short-rounded ends, not truncate, usually dark fawn changing to 
dark browTi or burnt umber, without eye-ring. 

Swiss Crimson. Refs. 13. Syns. Scarlet Swiss. 
Burr described this variety and seeds were exhibited 
before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1864. 
The variety is no longer known but seems to have been 
a vigorous grower often listed with bush sorts. The 
plant produced runners and so was considered to have 
been a climber. It was grown chiefly as a greenshell 
variety, the large long beans at that stage being bright 
pink, striped and spotted deep purplish red, changing 
soon to dark purplish red and brown. Flowers lilac. 

Tennessee Wonder. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. Brown 
Sickle, Holme's Improved Sickle. Landreth introduced 
Tennessee Wonder sometime before 1901. The type, 
however, is much older, for Martens described a variety, 
with figure, which is exceedingly similar, if not identical, 
and states further that the type was known to Savi. 
Martens had secured seed from Louisiana and from 
Chile which differed but little from the lot he described. 
Burr described a variety called Mottled Prolific which 
was similar in many ways but distinct from Martens' 
variety. The color of the pods, leaves, and stems is the 
same as for Scotia, but in other respects the varieties 
are different. The pods are larger and straighter than 
Kentucky Wonder pods, also later in season. It has 
been said that pods of Tennessee Wonder are the largest, 
straightest, and most handsome of all cultivated beans. 

Plant rather small, slender stemmed, moderately branched, 
climbing well, with purplish shading on stems, branches, foliage 
and pods; leaflets quite large, almost as broad as long, more rounded 
than those of Kentucky Wonder. Flowers pink. 

Pods light green in color. Quality fair to good; brittle, 
tender, nearly stringless and fiberless but coarse in texture. Size 
long, moderately broad and plump (6—8 x 5s inches) and contain- 
ing 8-9 seeds per pod. Shape round, very broad, oval to double- 
barrelled in cross-section, deeply creasebacked, moderately scimitar 
shaped, much constricted, not crowded, rough surfaced, filled to the 



tip and edge and pointed on the end. Spur long, moderately stout 
and curved. Suture, both placental and carpellary are rather 
deeply indented. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.7 x .65 x .55 cm. (65-70 per oz.); 
long reniform, plump, occasionally slightly twisted; ends rounded. 
Hilum medium, indented. Color quite similar to Scotia although 
it is a somewhat darker combination of (mouse gray) and ipale 
pinkish buff) blended into a very fine mottling over the entire surface. 
It is marked with long and curved streaks of dull black, usually on 
the hilar and dorsal surfaces although occasionally on the sides as 
well, and a moderately broad, black eye-ring. As the seed ages, 
the gray is very largely displaced by a dull tawny (russet ) color. 

Thuringen. Refs. 28, 47. Syns. Grand Sword 
Giant, Japan Giant Butter. This variety was tested 
at the Missouri Botanical Garden in 1900 but was not 
grown commercially in America. It was apparently 
well known and was described in France but little grown 
as the beauty of its pods was not enough to counter- 
balance rather poor yields and lateness. In Germany it 
was said to be fairly early and very productive. 

Plant a low climber, with light pink blossoms. Pods medium 
to long, straight, broad, flat but fleshy, short tipped, only slightly 
swollen by beans, brittle, tender, stringless, fiberless, light green 
slowly yellowing, handsome. Seeds very large, very broad, very 
flat with straight eye-side or rarely approaching kidney-shape, 
yellowish brown becoming light maroon. 

Transylvanian Butter. Refs. 63, 97. This bean 
was grown at the Geneva Station in 1882 and also in the 
trials at Kansas in 1889. Gregory secured seed from 
Germany and introduced the variety to American 
growers in 1885. It never became a popular sort and 
was soon dropped from the lists. The chief objection 
to the variety was its extreme lateness, for unless the 
season was long the plants were unproductive. 

Plant low-growing; foliage quite abundant, dark green, with 
small obovate or triangular, short-pointed leaflets. Flowers 
purplish. Pods short, 3} 2 to 4 inches, very broad, straight or 
nearly so, almost blunt-ended, with very short, straight dorsal 
tips, much swollen by seeds, dark green almost entirely covered 
with dark purple stripes, edible as snaps only in early stages, soon 
much wrinkled, stringy and fibrous. Seeds 6 or 7, very broad 
oval, ovate from edge, short-rounded or truncate ends, nearly 
1 ■> inch long, three-fourths as wide, more than half as thick, pale 
dirty blue shading to bluish dun. (In Kansas test Cranberry shape, 
greenish white, when young, clay yellow varrying darker when ripe.) 

True Asparagus. Several " asparagus " beans are 
known, the name being generally applied to Yard Long, 
a bean belonging to Vigna sineusis sesquipedalis, 

of a different genus from the common garden beans. 
The variety here described is grown in the Northwest, 
but was tested here and seems distinct from others, 
though somewhat like Kentucky Wonder, to which the 
name Asparagus Bean is also sometimes given. Thor- 
burn in 1899 offered a variety called French Asparagus 
producing round pods from 8 to 12 inches long. This 
was not the same as the variety known today as French 
Yard Long. 

Plant and foliage quite similar to those of Kentucky Wonder, 
but leaflets rather longer due to longer, often curved, rather acute 
tips. Pods broad oval, more slender than those of the compared 
variety, shorter with us but very long under favorable conditions, 
rather longer tipped, well filled, tender, fleshy, with slight string 
only, fiberless, fine-textured, of good quality. Seeds 7 or 8, much 
like those of Kentucky Wonder but more drab than brown. 



30 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Virginia Cornfield. Refs. 91. T. W. Wood 85 
Sons in 1905 were the first to list this variety, but the 
casualness of the introduction and the meager descrip- 
tion indicate an old variety rather than an origination. 
During the next 10 years it attained some popularity, 
but about 1915 it began to lose its position since it was 
too late for the North, too slender-podded, too tough, 
and too stringy for snaps and too small-seeded for green- 
shell beans. In the South it is grown among corn for a 
dry-shell bean, the white seeds being more acceptable 
for this purpose than the colored ones of many other pole 
beans. It somewhat resembles Missouri Wonder and 
Royal Corn in general character and usefulness, but 
is later and has smaller pods. Like Georgia Pole and 
Powell's Prolific, it is very late, but also, with these 
varieties, it represents a group that makes the largest 
growth of any other pole varieties. 

Plants large, good climbers, heavy-stemmed, much branched, 
very productive. Pods nearly 7 inches long, curved, flat, tough, 
stringy, fibrous, green occasionally marked purplish. Seeds 8 or 
9, about ] _> inch long, half as wide, oblong or slightly kidney- 
shaped, fairly plump, occasionally compressed on ends, white. 

Ward Prolific This variety was introduced by 
the Grand Junction Seed Company in 1925. It is a 
very late, very productive, small-podded variety, with 
pods of beautiful appearance, that are edible within 
80 to 85 days. The plants and pods resemble those of 
Scotia in many ways but are distinct showing less red 
throughout, the foliage is more dense, more compact, 
the leaflets are larger, less crumpled, and pods are edible 
nearly 10 days later. The seed is black, more like 
Black Creaseback or Ideal Market. 

Plant tall, 4 1 2 feet and more with spread of 2} -j feet at base, 
a good climber with rather dense compact growth: very vigorous, 
productive; stout stemmed, many branches, showing some red on 
stems but not as much as Scotia. Foliage very abundant, dark 
green; surface smooth, slightly crumpled, glossy, pubescent, thin; 
leaflets large. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods medium green in the snap stage but later becoming 
speckled with pinkish to purplish markings. Quality poor; stringy, 
quite fleshy, tough, fibrous and coarse in texture. Size medium 



long, rather narrow and quite plump, 1 4 J _>-5 ' ■ 



x :: « inches), 



containing 8-9 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly circular to 
broad cordate in cross-section, slightly but quite uniformly curved, 
straight backed to slightly crease backed, regular, very crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge and abruptly rounded to truncate 
at the end. Spur short, thick and straight. Suture, placental is 
flat to slightly indented and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds small, 1.0 x .6 x .45 cm., (145-150 per oz.); inclined to 
be somewhat rhomboidal, short, quite plump; ends distinctly trun- 
cate. Hilum medium, flat to slightly indented. Color very dull, 
cloudy black over the entire surface. 

White Asparagus. Refs. 47. This bean was 
described at the Missouri Botanical Garden in 1901, 
but does not appear to have been grown elsewhere in 
this country. The variety is apparently of German 
origin but has been grown in France and described by 
both Vilmorin and Denaiffe as Quatre-a-quatre. The 
plant may be described as a short-vined Lazy Wife, 
with finer foliage, somewhat flatter pods, and larger 
seeds. Denaiffe also describes separately an " Asperge " 
bean, also from Germany, which differs from Quatre-a- 
quatre, mainly in having somewhat taller vines and 



larger seeds. The two French varieties are probably 
only strains from an old German stock. Seed, dingy 
white. 

Vi hite Cranberry. Refs. 13, 28, 94, 98. White 
Cranberry was known in America as early as 1828 and 
was quite popular for a long time, for its white, green- 
shell beans. Sophie, Lazy Wife, and White Cranberry 
are names which have been represented in catalogs for 
more than a century. Of the three, Lazy Wife alone 
continues to be listed in current catalogs. There is 
no clear demarkation between these varieties. Denaiffe 
gives White Cranberry as a synonym of Coco Blanc 
which, according to his description, is identical with 
Lazy Wife. Vilmorin considers Sophie a strain of 
Coco Blanc, while Wing described Sophie as either the 
predecessor of Lazy Wife or its European form. By 
some White Cranberry was known by a few characters 
markedly different from other types, it being decidedly 
more stocky, with broader pods, wider from stem to 
tip, and with marked carmine or purplish shadings 
typical of the horticultural varieties, and also with 
seeds slightly longer in proportion than those of Sophie. 

White-Seeded Butter. Refs. 48, 52. Dallwig 
introduced this variety from Europe prior to 1901. It 
was quite similar to Burger Stringless, but with larger 
pods which were less round, straighter, decidedly stringy, 
and with seeds which were distinctly larger. 

White Sickle. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. White Wonder. 
This is another of the so-called corn field varieties grown 
in the South for many years before it was introduced 
by Richard Frotscher Co. in 1882. White Sickle is 
more like Royal Corn than any other variety, differing 
from it in later season and lower productivity. It also 
resembles Kentucky Wonder but has larger and later 
vine with pods longer, straighter, more crease backed, 
and a deeper green in color. The variety was listed in 
1921 by only two seedsmen, from one of which we 
obtained seed. The variety proved to be one of the 
Cornfield Pole beans, so the description is not our 
own but is shortened from those given by Tracy and 
Jarvis. 

Plant very tall growing, and holding fairly well to supports, 
very late, fairly to very productive in South. Pods most slender 
of any of Burger Stringless group, 9 inches or more long, nearly or 
quite straight near stem, but much curved toward tips, frequently 
twisted, round, much creased on both dorsum and ventrum, much 
swollen by beans and constricted in rather long separatory spaces 
between them, along all outlines wavy, more or less zigzag, tips 
longer than those of others in group, not very fleshy, but stringless, 
fiberless and fine grained, rough-surfaced, dark green. Seeds 8 or 9, 
nearly 5 s inches long, decidedly less than half as wide, elliptical 
in outline, flattened, often distorted, somewhat wrinkled, creamy 
white. 

White Soissons. Refs. 13, 47, 52, 56, 93, 94, 98. 

Soissons has been referred to under Caseknife, which 
it resembles but from which it is separable by its larger, 
broader seeds and the comparatively narrower, more 
constricted, wrinkled pods. According to Bois, it was 
first mentioned by De Combles in 1749, one of the very 
early dates in the history of distinct varieties of beans. 
It is said to have been grown near Soissons for 200 years. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



31 



It is too late for maturity in Central France, but farther 
south, and in favorable conditions elsewhere, it is highly 
esteemed for the size and beauty of the green beans, as 
well as for a peculiarly pleasing flavor which develops 
only under the best conditions. It was listed and 
described in America several times during the two 
decades or more after 1860, but probably little grown. 
Vt ild Goose. Refs. 13. A variety that has been 
known and grown in Europe and America perhaps 
more as a novelty than as a commercial sort. The 
large fat pods are hardly suitable for market use but 
are fair in quality when young. The shell beans are 
excellent either as green or dry shell. 

Plant tall, 7 to 8 feet, vigorous, good climber, rather open 
growth particularly above the base of plant; foliage medium abund- 
ant, dark green, leaves crumpled, somewhat rough, medium heavy 
veining, medium thick. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods pale green when young, turning to cream yellow streaked 
and marked with light purple in green shell stage. Quality fair; 
not very fleshy, stringless, quite fiberless, and medium in texture. 
Size short to medium, broad and slender, (4-5 x 5s x } 2 inches), 
containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long ovate in cross- 
section, straight although occasionally scimitar-shaped, straight 
backed, constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the edge but 
not to the tip and square to truncate on the end. Spur medium 
long, thick and slightly curved. Suture, placental is flat and carpel- 
lary, acute. 

Seeds large, 1.4 x 1 x .6 cm., (45-50 per oz.); very broad, 
short oval, fairly plump to somewhat flattened, long oval thru 
cross-section; ends rounded but inclined to be wedge-like to some 
extent. Hilum small, flattened. Color buff (pale pinkish buff), 
splashed and spotted over the entire surface with deep purple which 
in older seed becomes black, marked with a narrow yellowish buff 
eye-ring. 

Woodward. Ref. 4. Gregoiy included Woodward 
in his list of varieties in 1885. His description stated 
that this bean was among the " select varieties of former 
years." From the brief description given it appears to 
differ from Jordan Self-drier only in having pure white, 
rather than ivory-white seeds; as it also is late, healthy, 
vigorous, productive, very tender-podded, and with 
seeds " round as bullets." These similarities place 
Woodward as a strain or selection from Lazy Wife rather 
than as a distinct variety. 

Yellow Cranberry. Refs. 13, 49. Seed of this 
variety were part of the collection of 100 different kinds 
of bean seed exhibited before the Massachusetts Horti- 
cultural Society in 1864. Burr listed the variety in 
1863, commenting favorably on the productivity of the 
plant and quality of the pods. It was late for the 
type, two weeks later than Red Cranberry and a few 
days later than White Cranberry, producing edible pods 
in 10 weeks and edible beans about 18 days later. It 
was hardy and productive, of good quality as string 
or green shell beans, and the dry beans were equal to 
White Marrow for baking, although not as good color. 

Plant of medium height, 5 to 6 feet; foliage yellowish green. 
Pods 5 > z inches long, often " sickle-shaped," ? 4 inch broad, pale 
green, later becoming cream yellow, shrivelled and irregular. Seeds 
round-ovoid, ) £ inch long, three-fourths as wide, and as thick, 
yellow with narrow dark eye-ring. 

Zebra. This is the French representative of 
Scotia-type beans, raised by Mons. Perrier of France 



about the middle of the past century. It was noticed 
in the United States in 1856, grown by Irish about 1900, 
and has been listed in England and Australia. 

Vines tall, very vigorous, with abundant dark grayish green 
foliage, flowers light lilac. Pods short, fleshy, round (Irish says 
wide, " Much flattened "), slightly curved, practically stringless 
and fiberless, and of very good quality. Seeds like those of Scotia, 
but larger, distinctly ovoid and very plump. 

WAX PODS 

Algiers. Refs. 98. This name is usually found in 
connection with a strain of German Black Wax or Indian 
Chief. In France it is known as D'Alger Noir a Rames 
and as such is considered a synonym of the varieties 
mentioned above. At Geneva in 1884 the plants grown 
as Algiers proved to be entirely unlike D'Alger Noir, 
differing in some ways from any other variety in the 
trial. 

Plant slender, moderately tall; pods very broad, much 
wrinkled. Seeds large, 75 to the ounce, oblong, very broad, strongly 
flattened sidewise, often transversely bent by the wrinkling of the 
pod, jet black, shining. 

American Wax. Refs. 28, 47. A variety that is 
quite similar to Black Scimitar, very late in season. It 
was described by Irish but is unknown in present day 
listings. 

Plant rather small; leaflets light green, small, thick, crumpled, 
wrinkled. Flowers purple. Pods shorter than those of Black 
Scimitar or White Zulu, 4 to 6 inches long, much more curved, 
broad, flat, with proportionately longer, slender, curved tips, green- 
ish yellow (strongly striped or tinted violet, — Denaiffe). Seeds 
like those of Black Scimitar, but more irregular, dull, not shining, 
black or dull brown. 

Andalusia. Refs. 45, 48, 63, 79, 91. Syns. Golden 
Andalusia, Golden Lazy Wife. Johnson 8b Stokes 
secured seed of this variety from a bean grower at 
Andalusia, Pa., gave it the name of the town and intro- 
duced it in their catalog of 1888. Andalusia, or Golden 
Lazy Wife, was a midseason variety, very productive, 
and only slightly affected by disease. It was fairly 
popular for a time, being listed by about 25 firms in 
1901; but has now disappeared from catalogs. In 
many of its characteristics it closely resembles Indian 
Chief, but is nearly a week later and has pods that are 
shorter, much more curved, deeper yellow, and with a 
longer spur. 

Moore's New Golden Lazy Wife, introduced in 
1923, is evidently only a small-podded, small-seeded 
type of Golden Cluster. 

Plant large, well branched, climbing well when fully estab- 
lished, with light-colored, thick stems; foliage light green. Pods 
medium size, about 5 inches long, much curved, rather flat at best 
snap stage, later becoming almost round, plump, somewhat swollen 
over beans and constricted between them, with short -rounded or 
almost blunt ends and rather short, straight central tips, clear rich 
yellow. Seeds 6 or 7 crowded in pods, less spherical than those of 
Lazy Wife, nearly as wide as long, but somewhat flattened, dis- 
tinctly ovate in longitudinal section, with well rounded eyes, white. 

Baldwin Wonder Wax. Refs. 65. Syns. Kidney 
Shaped Wax Pole. This is a pole bean introduced in 
1915 by D. M. Ferry from seed secured from a Mr. 
Baldwin of West Virginia. The young pods are long, 
cylindrical, of a clear waxy white, very small, and string- 



32 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



less. As they mature they resemble pods of Kentucky 
Wonder Wax but are more slender and a week later in 
season. The seed resembles seed of Dwarf Kidney Wax 
in size and shape. 

Plants like those of Golden Cluster. Pods differ only in 
slightly greater length and slightly less width with greater thick- 
ness, all tending to make them appear more slender, of equally good 
color and quality. They also show slight, very long S-curve. Seeds 
small, about 125 to the ounce, about ?g > ncn long, or slightly more, 
about one-half as wide, long oblong or slightly kidney-shaped, with 
short -rounded ends, narrow oval in cross-section, with markings 
like Horticultural beans, but duller, — background putty colored, 
and markings brownish. 

Black German. Refs. 15, 48. Plant, foliage, and 
flowers of Black German and Indian Chief are indis- 
tinguishable and the history and description are given 
under the latter as the better known of the two. The 
pods of Black German are straighter, broader, flatter, 
with a less well-defined point and are more depressed 
between the beans, which are shorter, more nearly 
globose, more regular and deep, shining black. 

Broad Wax. Gregory listed this variety in 1885 
among the select varieties of recent years. The pods 
were enormously broad and long, exceeding in size any 
pole bean cultivated; which seems to be confirmed by 
compared figures of Broad Wax and Giant Wax. Nothing 
has been found regarding the history of the variety, 
although it seems similar in most respects to one of the 
sub-varieties of Intestin of which the pods are light 
green becoming yellow toward maturity and much 
thicker than wide, a marked characteristic of Broad Wax 
(properly " Thick " Wax). Gregory credits the variety 
with extreme earliness for a pole bean, but the Intestin 
varieties are midseason or late. From appearance of 
pod, the seeds are evidently thick, broad ovoid, and from 
general resemblance to Intestin, probably white. It is a 
string and green-shell bean, early and fairly productive. 

California. Refs. 90. According to Burr, who 
did not mention the California in his original treatise 
on vegetables, its true name and origination are unknown, 
the common name being given in accordance with a 
custom then quite common in the east of calling " Cali- 
fornia " any new fruit, flower, or vegetable originally 
received from that state. The variety was grown to 
quite an extent on the Pacific Coast of South America, 
in some parts of California, and in the Sandwich Islands. 
It was early, pods being ready for use in 9 weeks from 
May 20th, and seeds ripe in 3 weeks more; hardy, 
productive, holding over long season, much used for 
string beans, but most valued for the green shell beans 
which are of excellent quality. 

Plant healthy, vigorous, 6 feet tall or more; flowers white. 
Pods long, broad, flat, green, changing to cream yellow. Seeds 
6 to 8, kidney-shaped, J jj inch long, J g inch wide, clear ochre-yellow. 

Fillbasket Wax. Refs. 28, 47, 52. Syns. Wax 
Case Knife. There are two strains of pole beans with 
this name, one of which originated in Germany shortly 
before 1899 and was grown in the Missouri Botanical 
Garden tests, but otherwise seems unknown in America. 
Irish called it Wax Case Knife, and described it as 
identical with Caseknife except that the pods are waxy 



yellow. The other strain is green podded and was 
described by Denaiffe as a sub-variety of Case Knife, 
much shorter in vine with longer and narrower pods 
and longer seeds. This green podded Fillbasket was also 
grown and described in the trials of the Royal Horti- 
cultural Society in 1918. There is also a dwarf sort 
called Fillbasket Wax. 

Flageolet Wax. Refs. 90. This bean is said to 
be of German origin, although the name is French. The 
Flageolet Beurre a Rames, however, which should be 
this variety and apparently corresponds to it in many 
ways, is described by Denaiffe as very stringy and fibrous 
except in very early stages, which is entirely different 
from the character given it in America. 

Plant early, very productive, with pods in clusters, borne close 
to ground, 7 ! 2 to 8 inches long, round, full, fleshy, stringless, rich 
golden yellow, " most half-transparent look of any bean." Seeds 
large, long kidney-shaped, reddish brown. 

Giant Red. Refs. 45, 63, 66, 97, 98. This is 
not the same as the Runner bean commonly known in 
England as Red Giant but is an American variety said 
to have been introduced to Philadelphia growers in 1866. 
As grown at Geneva in 1882 it was much later than 
Indian Chief and less productive. Burr in 1862 did 
not mention it nor did Irish have it in his trials. The 
pods were not of the highest quality for use as string 
beans but were excellent for green shells. 

Vines large, leaves abundant, broad oval, slightly heart- 
shaped, obtuse-tipped. Flowers large, white. Pods 7-8 inches 
long, straight or slightly curved, broad, flat, much swollen by beans; 
irregular, fleshy, succulent and tender, rather coarse-textured, 
yellow, which color remains on cooking. Seeds 5 or 6, sometimes 8, 
broad oval, slightly longer, not quite as plump as those of Indian 
Queens, dark reddish brown. 

Golden Champion. Refs. 47, 48, 59, 91. Hender- 
son, the introducer of this variety, procured seed from 
Germany in 1890, the first listing occurring in his 1891 
catalog. It was commended in a test at the Kansas 
Station in 1891 because of its earliness and productivity; 
but by 1901, when tested at the Missouri Botanical 
Garden, it had either deteriorated or untrue stock had 
been secured, as it was very short-podded. 

Pods long, slender, round, whitish yellow, smooth surfaced, 
somewhat tough and stringy and of only fair quality. Seeds were 
most typically kidney shaped, slender, and longest of any black- 
seeded wax bean. 

Golden Cluster. Refs. 10, 14, 15, 29, 36, 48, 52, 

59, 63, 66, 67, 68, 77, 79, 84, 85, 91. Syns. White 
Algerian, Early Golden Cluster Wax. In America, 
Golden Cluster was introduced in 1806 by Henry A. 
Dreer as Early Golden Cluster Wax Pole. Seed had 
been procured from John Kramer of Doylestown, Pa., 
who had originally procured stocks from Germany. 
Golden Cluster was known to Martens, at least as a 
type, and under the name White Algerian it was grown 
in the Geneva trials in 1882. This White Algerian 
strain, both at the Missouri Botanical Garden and in 
early tests here, appeared shorter podded as compared 
with Martens' description and figure or with some 
stocks of Golden Cluster as grown in recent Geneva 
tests. The popularity of Golden Cluster Wax has 




(Natural size) 



EARLY STRINGLESS WAX 



^ 








KENTUCKY WONDER WAX 



• It 




GOLDEN POD 



til 



' 



GOLDEN LAZY WIFE 



\y 




GOLDEN CLUSTER WAX 



Natural size) 



TYPES OF WAX PODDED POLE BEANS 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



33 



gradually receded, while that of Kentucky Wax has 
ascended. The variety still is capable of producing 
attractive, flat, nearly straight, fleshy pods. It is 
most suitable as a snap pod bean, but can also be used 
as a green shell and dry seed bean. The first pods were 
pickable in 74 days at Geneva or about 7 days later 
than Kentucky Wonder Wax. While in many ways like 
Kentucky Wonder Wax, the seeds are a dull white 
instead of maroon to chocolate brown, the pods are 
shorter, straighter, wider, flatter, but have the same 
pinkish coloring at green shell stage, the vines are larger 
and more vigorous. In general utility and quality it 
stands next to Golden Carmine-Podded Horticultural. 
Golden Wax also resembles Sunshine Wax, an old variety 
introduced by Burpee in 1890. Sunshine, however, has 
very plump, oval, reddish brown seeds. 

Plant large, 4 1 j feet tall and more, spread at base 1 3 X feet, 
good climbing habit, dense growth thruout, very vigorous, hardy, 
productive over moderate producing period; thick, heavy stemmed, 
yellowish green color, moderately branched, wholly green. Foliage 
abundant, light to bright green; leaf surface smooth to slightly 
crumpled, slight pubescence, medium in thickness; leaflets large, 
broad, 4 ] 4 to 4 5 s inches long, 3j± to 4 1 _> inches wide; terminal leaf 
bi-symmetrical, evenly and well rounded from widest point (one- 
fourth the distance from base) to stem; lateral leaflets decidedly one- 
sided; both taper nearly straight to short obtuse tips. Flowers 
white. 

Pods clear, light, very waxy yellow in color. Quality excel- 
lent, brittle, tender, stringless, fiberless and of fairly fine texture. 
Size fairly long, broad and medium slender to plump, (5-7 x %-% x 
; . inches), containing 7-8 seeds per pod. Shape flat, ovate-acumi- 
nate in cross-section, slightly curved, straight backed, regular to 
somewhat constricted, not crowded, quite smooth, filled to the 
tip but not to the edge, and rounded to tapering on the end. Spur 
short, medium thick and rigidly straight. Suture, placental irregu- 
larly rounded and slightly indented while carpellary is moderately 
acute. 

Seeds medium to large 1.4 x .85 x .5 cm., (70 per oz.), broad 
ova!, decidedly flattened, often irregular in thickness like those of 
Caseknite; abruptly rounded to truncate ends. Hilum medium, 
flat. Color dull white thru which shows grayish-vein-like markings 
over the entire surface. 

Hungarian Butter. Refs. 63. There seems to be 
little recorded in English writings of the bean varieties 
that might be found in countries other than France, 
England, and Germany. The origin of Hungarian 
Butter is attributed to southeastern Europe, Gregory 
introducing the variety in 1890. The Kansas Station in 
trials the same year found the plant to be a weak, slender 
climber with small to medium, broad, obtusely tipped 
leaflets. The pods were in length about like Golden 
Cluster, in shape like Kentucky Wonder Wax, almost 
round or angular, fleshy, and quite stringless, and the 
seeds 4 to 8, very similar to those of the Kentucky 
Wonder Wax, but rather lighter in color, brownish dun 
and with a dark eye-ring which was black in the green 
beans. 

Indian Chief. Refs. 12, 13, 47, 48, 56, 91, 93, 
94, 97, 98. Syns. Algiers, Algerian Wax Pole, Black 
Algerian Wax Pole, Black Wax Pole, German Black Wax 
Pole, Tall German Black Wax Pole. Two black- 
seeded wax pole beans have been known in America for 
three-quarters of a century, so similar in most respects 
that separation was difficult even with pure stocks of 



both. Considering the exchanges of synonyms, mix- 
tures of seeds, merging of types, and practical disap- 
pearance from catalogs of the oldest common name 
of one type, writers on beans, past or present, are quite 
excusable for considering the two as one. Early records 
taken at Geneva show that while German Wax, Black 
Wax, and Indian Chief were very nearly identical, yet 
German Wax was a much later variety in edible pods 
as well as dry seeds. Black Wax seems to be intermedi- 
ate in characters in comparison with the other varieties. 

One of these strains was undoubtedly the first 
wax-podded bean known in Germany early in the 
second quarter of the last century. Denaiffe describes 
under a French name and as a sub-variety of Indian 
Chief, Alger Noir a Rames, a German variety which 
seems identical with Black German and which is prob- 
ably the one included by Wing under German synonyms 
of that variety. Martens placed most of the synonyms 
belonging to these varieties under Phaseolus sphaericus 
niger. 

It is said to have come to Europe from China 
in 1837, to France in 1840, and to the United States 
about 1852. It is chiefly valuable for the attractive, 
waxy-yellow, stringless pods, suitable as snap pods or 
green shells. In season late, not always certain to 
mature in the North. Therefore, it has been generally 
succeeded by earlier, larger, and more attractive podded 
types, such as Golden Cluster Wax, Kentucky Wonder 
Wax, or Golden Carmine-Podded Horticultural. 

Plant large, climbing well after rather slow start, moderately 
compact, vigorous, moderately productive of long bearing period; 
heavy stemmed, many branches usually tinged reddish near nodes. 
Foliage medium abundant, medium to grayish green; leaf surface 
smooth, flat; leaflets rather narrow, medium size, long pointed. 
Flowers lilac. 

Pods deep rich yellow in color. Quality very good; brittle, 
tender, nearly stringless, fiberless and fine in texture. Size medium 
long, moderately broad, and fairly plump, {S}'r-6 J^x finches), 
containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross-section, 
moderately to much curved, very slightly crease-backed, slightly 
constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and 
rounded to somewhat tapering at the end. Spur short, thick and 
curved. Suture, placental is slightly indented and carpellary, 
obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.1 x .85 x .6 cm., (80 per oz.), short, broad 
oval to oblong oval, broad oval thru cross-section, plump; ends 
abruptly rounded to somewhat compressed suggesting an angular 
or irregular general shape. Hilum small, protuberant. Color dull 
black with a bluish tinge which is quite evident. 

Ivory-Pod Wax. Refs. 63. This bean is known 
to us only through a test at the Kansas Station in 1889. 

Plant low, slender runner, with small, light green leaflets. 
Flowers white. Pods abundant, 3 to 4} o inches long, curved, ivory 
white. Seeds 4 to 6, oblong oval, often truncate, often irregular 
and shrunken, polished veiny white. 

Kentucky Wonder Wax. Refs. 4, 48, 77, 91. 
Syns. Ohio Wax Pole, Schwill's Wonderful Wax Pole, 
Prosperity Wax Pole, Texas Prolific Wax, Old Home- 
stead Wax, Golden Pod Kentucky Wax. What was 
evidently a precursor of this variety was listed in 1889 
as Ivory Pod Wax Kentucky, but Tracy and Jarvis say 
that Kentucky Wonder Wax was introduced in 1901 
by Johnson & Musser. A later catalog of that firm's 



34 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



successors says that the variety was noticed by them in 
1898 in the garden of Miss Callahan, Los Angeles, 
Calif., and offered in 1899 in small quantities. No 
earlier record of how or where this most popular wax- 
podded pole bean originated can be found. The pods are 
suitable for either snap pods or green shell beans. After 
30 years trial it is now the most popular of the wax- 
podded pole varieties. Many name variations and 
synonyms have been used for Kentucky Wonder Wax 
which is evidence of its widespread use. In season 
it is an early variety, 68 days, or one week earlier than 
Golden Cluster Wax. The pods resemble those of 
Golden Cluster but are longer, narrower, shorter- 
pointed, earlier, but less hardy and vigorous; the seed 
is colored instead of white. The pods are not as much 
curved and distorted as those of the green-podded 
Kentucky Wonder but are more curved and less regular 
than Golden Cluster. 

Plant small to medium, growth about 4} ■> feet tall with spread 
of 1 J _> feet at the base, a good climber but open in growth ; only 
fairly vigorous, short in bearing period, productive; slender stemmed, 
rather sparingly branched, yellowish green often with reddish 
tinge near nodes. Foliage scanty to medium abundant, medium 
to dull dark green: leaf surface crumpled, slightly rough, slightly 
pubescent: leaflets large, 4} , to 4", inches long for terminals, 4 to 
4 1 4 inches wide at about one-fourth the distance from the base of 
leaf, slightly heart shaped at stem, distinctly longer and propor- 
tionately narrower for the one-seeded laterals, margins well rounded 
at widest point and straight or slightly incurved to tapering tips. 
Flowers white. 

Pods light yellow in color. Quality good; very brittle, moder- 
ately stringy, not exceedingly fibrous, fleshy, and of moderately 
coarse texture. Size long, medium broad and moderately plump 
(6-8 x \ _. x "'i-fs inches I, containing 6-8 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat at first, becoming broad ovate and finally quite square in cross- 
section, curved, not as much as Kentucky Wonder, but more so 
than Golden Cluster, occasionally S-shaped, crease backed, con- 
stricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and fairly well to the 
edge, and rounded to tapering on the end. Spur short, thick 
and straight. Suture, placental is slightly indented, and carpellary, 
obtuse. 

Seeds large, 1.6 x .9 x .6 cm. (80 per oz.\ broad oval to sub- 
reniform, long oval thru cross-section, somewhat flattened, seed 
coat inclined to be wrinkled; ends abruptly rounded and often 
truncate. Hilum medium, indented. Color shining seal to choco- 
late brown (burnt umber ) over entire surface. 

Mastiff Golden-Pod. This variety, the largest 
podded of the pole beans, was introduced by Johnson & 
Stokes in 1892. The variety, in spite of its good points, 
apparently disappeared in a decade, as it was not listed 
in the catalogs of 1901. While late, it was very produc- 
tive and with pods of good quality. 

Plant tall, vigorous, climbing well; foliage rather scanty 
medium to light green; leaflets of medium size, short, broad. Pods 
much like those of Golden Cluster, often long, with long rounded 
ends, and very short dorsal tips; very fleshy, nearly round as beans 
enlarge, light waxy yellow, " of rich buttery flavor. Seeds about 6, 
apparently quite large, short oval, plump, light yellow. 

Mont D"Or Pole. Refs. 28, 47, 48, 51, 52, 91, 

93, 94, 97, 98. Syns. Golden Butter. This variety, 
as its name foretells, is a French sort which originated 
near Lyons sometime before 1874 when its merits were 
noted in an English horticultural periodical. According 
to French records, the variety spread rapidly, being 
grown and much appreciated in Germany which prob- 



ably led to earlier statements that the variety originally 
came from there. Just when or by whom it was brought 
to America is uncertain, but it has been listed by seeds- 
men at least since 1883 when it was cataloged by Gregory. 
It is a later wax-podded variety suited for home use 
but not as a market variety as the pod color is poor when 
cooked. It is late in season, although somewhat earlier 
than Indian Chief. The pods are flatter and straighter 
than pods of Indian Chief. In some respects they 
resemble pods of some of the bush wax-podded varieties, 
such as Curries, the pods of which do not become rounded 
out at the green-shell stage as do pods of Indian Chief. 

Plant, at Geneva this variety has shown rather poor growth, 
not over 3} o feet tall, climbing weakly: vigor poor, open growth, 
slow to start climbing; late, rather unproductive; slender stemmed, 
few branches, slightly reddish tinged. Foliage scanty, light green, 
surface somewhat crumpled, slightly rough, thick; leaflets small 
2 ' _> inches long, 2 inches wide ; widest one-fourth the distance from 
the base, well rounded to stem, terminal leaf bi-symmetrical, side 
leaflets one-sided but rounded, tips short pointed. Flowers Phlox 
Pink. 

Pods uniformly light clear yellow in color. Quality excellent; 
stringless, entirely fiberless, brittle, tender and fine in texture. 
Size moderately long, quite broad, and slender, 5 1 4 -6 x Js x ■ , 
inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross- 
section, moderately straight, straight backed, regular to slightly 
constricted, not crowded, very smooth, filled to the tip and edge 
and distinctly rounded at the end. Spur short, moderately stout 
and straight. Suture, placental flattened and carpellary, acute to 
moderately obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.25 x .8 x .7 cm., (70-75 per oz.), short, 
broad oval, very plump, nearly circular in cross-section; ends 
uniformly but abruptly rounded. Hilum small, flattened. Color 
reddish brown (liver brown) under color quite uniformly mottled 
and spotted with very dark almost blackish brown over entire 
surface, occasionally blotched solidly over a small area on the ends 
or dorsal surface with the same shade. Fresh seeds occasionally 
have all or part of the surface blotched with purple blackish purple . 

Queen. Refs. 47. Irish included Queen in his list 
and there seems to be no other indication of its rise in 
America. It is evidently of German origin, but no 
longer listed in either Germany or France. According 
to Irish, it differed from Indian Chief only in the seeds 
which were nearly globular, like those of Black German, 
but larger than those of Indian Chief. 

St. Fiaere. Refs. 52, 65. This is a French variety 
which was introduced by Vilmorin in 1893 and brought 
to America about 1914, nearly 20 years later, by 
Farquhar. Productive of long, fleshy, beautiful white 
pods but evidently too late in season to gain a place in 
America. 

Plant very tall, vigorous, climbing well, quite resistant to 
disease, with abundant, flat, smooth, very light green foliage. 
Flowers white or pale lilac. Pods 6 ] 2 to 7 3 i inches long, -,, to 
nearly 3 4 inch wide, with heavy profile, almost round and swollen 
over beans, very fleshy, stringless and fiberless. Seeds 7 to 8, 
elongated kidney-shape, broad, considerably flattened. f « to nearly 
3 4 inch long, not quite half as wide, rather more than one-third as 
thick, grayish coffee brown. 

Sunshine Wax. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. Red Sissons. 
Burpee in 1890 introduced this variety to the American 
trade. Some growers on Long Island were said to have 
had seed and grown the beans since 1887. Originally 
it was said to have come from France where it was 
known as Red Sissons. In the trials at Geneva in 1890 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



35 



and at the Michigan Station it was held to be identical 
with Golden Cluster except for the reddish brown color 
of the seeds which were very broad and plump. 

White Zulu. Refs. 47. 59, 67, 85. This variety 
was grown to a limited extent for a decade or so after 
1888, when it was introduced by Burpee. It is merely 
a slight variation of Black Scimitar with greenish 
yellow pods which later become almost white with a 
faint violet shading and which are broader and more 
fleshy than the original. 

Yellow-Podded White. Refs. 97, 98. This 
variety was introduced by Gregory in 1882 and was 
grown at Geneva the same year. It did not do well in 
the Station tests, but Gregory says its pods were as 
long as those of Giant Wax and that it exceeded the 
variety in earliness and productivity. 

Plant low climbing. Flowers white. Pods 5?4 to 6 3 4 inches 
long, rather flat, curved, somewhat swollen by beans, yellow. Seeds 
oblong kidney-shaped, strongly flattened sidewise, sometimes 
slightly compressed at ends, D s inch long, half as wide, hardly 
one-third as thick, white, veiny. 

THE DWARF VARIETIES OF GARDEN BEANS 
The dwarf varieties of garden beans are further 
divided into the green pods and wax pods. The color 
of the pod seems to be the only clear separatory character 
to use for a grouping of the varieties in this section. 
The next natural division would be into flat pods and 
round pods, but there are many varieties with pods 
that are intermediate between flat and round and some 
with pods which appear flat when small but which are 
quite round as the seed develops. 

This group, so far as the habit of growth and plant 
characters are concerned, could also include those varie- 
ties found in the section on horticultural and field beans. 
However, they have been separated here in a general 
way according to the method of using, either snap beans, 
shell beans, or dry beans. The dwarf varieties of garden 
beans, as here considered, are those varieties grown fcr 
the pods which are cooked when young or at the stage of 
maturity when they can rightly be called snap beans. 

The increase in the number of bean varieties has 
been largely a development of the last ICO years. Many 
of our well-known varieties, such as Dwarf Caseknife, 
Dwarf Cranberry, Red Valentine, Refugee, Dwarf 
Indian Chief, and York Dwarf Wax, have been known 
for 100 years or more, but their origin is unknown. 
From 1865 to 1890 many of the new varieties introduced 
were brought in from France, England, and Germany. 
Flageolet, Fullmer, Longfellow, and Matchless are 
representative of this group. During the next 20 years 
many new varieties, including practically all of the better 
ones grown today, were introduced by growers and 
breeders in this country. The new varieties have 
represented improvement in vigor, disease resistance, 
pod color, pod length, straightness of pod, and quality. 
Apparently most of the older varieties produced pods 
that were stringy and it was not until 1894 that N. B. 
Keeney found what he considered to be the first abso- 
lutely stringless green podded variety. This was named 
Burpee's Stringless Green Pod. There now are strains 



of Red Valentine, Black Valentine, and Refugee with 
pods which ere stringless. Quality has been greatly 
improved for the wax pods as well as the green pods. 
Bountiful, Full Measure, Burpee's Stringless Green 
Pod, Giant Stringless Green Pod, Tendergreen, Pencil 
Pod, Brittle Wax, Kidney Wax, and Sure Crop are 
varieties introduced within the last 30 years. These 
are truly stringless sorts and, together with the stringless 
strains of the varieties mentioned above, constitute a 
list of the most commonly grown and suitable beans for 
snap pods. 

GREEN PODS 

Abundance. Refs. 51. Syn. Dwarf Abundance. 
This variety was introduced to American growers by 
Grey in 1916; the seed came from Vilmorin who first 
sponsored the variety in 1908. As grown at Geneva it 
proved to be a mid-season variety, 55 days, seven days 
later than Black Valentine. It is very productive with 
long, slender pods stringless only in very early stages; 
of little value except as a forcing or early shell variety. 

Plant 1 to Irs feet tall, erect, vigorous. Foliage dense, dark 
green, smooth; leaflets very large, 5 3 4 inches long, nearly 4 inches 
wide, long, broadly taper pointed. Flowers lilac. Pods 6 to 6 3 i 
inches long, ' •_> inch wide, broadly ovate in cross-section, straight, 
with tapering, pointed end and long, slender, straight tip: color 
rather distinctive, mingled dark and light green. Seeds 4 to 5, 
about 75 to the ounce, cylindrical to long kidney, flattened, with 
rounded ends, deep carmine violet in color. 

Asgrow Valentine. This is a new bean of recent 
introduction coming from a cross between Pencil Pod 
(wax) and Black Valentine. The Associated Seed 
Growers, Inc., are the sponsors for this new variety 
which came from their breeding grounds at Filer, 
Idaho, in 1930. The improvement as here offered is 
due to the elimination of the stringy character from 
Black Valentine. The pods of Asgrow are without 
string and equally early in season with Black Valentine. 

Plants are practically identical with those of the old type 
Black Valentine; pods long, 6-7j^ inches, quite straight thick or 
oval in shape, entirely stringless, with some fiber, meaty and fine 
texture. Seeds jet black and identical in size and shape to those 
of Black Valentine. 

Barbes. Refs. 47, 93, 94. A French variety, 
originated in the Midi and introduced about 1889, 
which is almost identical with Hundredfold, but with 
rather larger, lighter -colored seeds, and with more 
distinct eye-ring. It was also considered more vigorous 
and more productive. 

Barteldes Stringless Green Pod. This variety is 
distinctly different from all other stringless green pods. 
It was offered for the second time by Barteldes in 1912 
and originated some time before that date with a market 
gardener near Ottumwa, Kansas. It is very early, 
47 days, in season with Burpee's Stringless Green Pod, 
not especially productive, pods rather short but fleshy, 
brittle, stringless, fiberless and fine textured; somewhat 
similar in general characters to Canadian Glory. 

Plant very dwarf, about 10 inches tall, erect, with compara- 
tively few branches, runnerless. Foliage very dark green, somewhat 
glossy; leaflets 3 to 3 ' ■> inches long, 2U to 2' 4 ' inches wide, widest 
very near base, tapering to slightly rounding edges, rather sharp 
points. Flowers blush pink. Pods 43 2 to 4 J 4 inches long, broad- 



36 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



oval or ovate in cross-section, plump, considerably curved, with 
pointed ends terminating in long curved tips, medium green in color. 
Seeds 4 to 5, about 90 to the ounce, very short oval, or usually 
ovate, about J 3 inch long, three-fourths as wide, very plump, with 
strongly rounded ends, never truncate, pinkish fawn, distinctly 
marked with large areas of lemon yellow, with quite wide purplish- 
brown eye-ring, the purple color often extending in faint streaks 
over ends of bean. 

Best of All. Refs. 14, 16, 26, 27, 29, 41, 47, 48, 
51, 63, 80, 81, 91, 97, 98. Syns. Best Dwarf, Breck's 
String and Shell, Earliest Green-pod, Isbell's Earliest, 
McMillan's Prolific, Shipper's Favorite, Sion House, 
Sutton's Dwarf Sugar, Turc. Tracy says Best of All 
criginated in Germany and came to America about 1876. 
We have been unable, however, to trace it definitely 
to that country. Except for uncertain statements of 
color, it seems the same as Marten's Phaseolus 
oblongus turcicus. Several names, later made syno- 
nyms with Best of All, were known quite early in France 
and England. It is still occasionally listed and in its 
better form is a very attractive and useful string bean. 
It was formerly a favorite in southern markets, but also 
considered very late in season for northern growing. 
Best of All differs from Giant Forcer only in color of 
seed; from Longfellow in seeds of different color and 
shape and in slightly thicker, longer, and more curved 
pods. 

Flant about 1 foot tall, not twining. Foliage dark green, 
rough; leaflets large, obovate, taper pointed. Flowers blush pink. 
Pods green when young, more or less blotched rose, smooth, almost 
straight, constricted, with blunt, curved tip, 5 to 5'j inches long, 
with 3 or 4 beans (Tracy describes two types, one flat -podded, much 
like preceding; the other a later development, a round-podded type, 
7 inches or more long, with 6 or 8 crowded seeds.) Seeds more 
plump in round pod type, oblong, or broad kidney-shaped, with 
ventral edge straight, slightly to considerably flattened, round oval 
to flattened oval in cross-section, ends rounded or slightly com- 
pressed, buff to light brown, mottled and streaked with dull red, with 
yellow ring about the eye, quite similar to Horticultural beans in 
color, but easily distinguishable by oblong, slightly flattened form. 

Black Belgian. This bean was known and com- 
mended for earliness by Reichard, who wrote in 1821. 
It was at one time a very popular and widely dis- 
tributed variety, especially in Europe. It was grown at 
Geneva in 1883 and 1884. 

Plant moderately vigorous, strictly dwarf, 5 / 6 to 1 foot tall, 
compact; leaflets of medium size, somewhat pointed, but slightly 
crumpled, dull pale green. Flowers lilac. Pods 4 to 4*4 inches 
long, straight, green when young, later with purplish patches, 
stringy, fibrous. Seeds 5, about 115 to the ounce, slightly less to 
rather more than J > inch long, broad, elliptical, sometimes slightly 
kidney-shaped, shining black. 

Black-Eyed China. Refs. 13. A variety men- 
tioned only by Burr, and not traceable in England, 
France or Germany. It was said to produce fair snap 
pods and dried beans but was at its best when used for 
shelling green; early, productive, ripening evenly. 

Slightly less vigorous than China Red-eye, with 5-inch pods 
each containing 5 or 6 oblong seeds, one-half inch long, three- 
eighths inch wide, slightly flattened, with ends usually rounded 
but sometimes truncate, white, spotted and eye marked black. 

Black Prime. Refs. 48. This name does not 
occur in American catalogs but Jarvis described it as 
very similar to Black Valentine in pod, and in plant 



somewhat as Wonder of France. It originated in 
France, probably with Denaiffe, about 1899. 

Plants more erect than those of Negro Long-pod; earlier and 
more productive; but pods shorter, more curved, very dark green, 
stringy. Seeds longer, possibly more plump, and more often 
runcate at ends, shining black. 

Black Speckled. Refs. 47, 51, 93, 94, 97. Burr, 
Wing and Irish described Black Speckled and it was 
mentioned in the American Horticultural Annual. It 
was of French origin, dating back to the middle of the 
last century, and was best known in the gardens near 
Paris. It was also grown in England and Germany. 
This variety appears to correspond very closely to the 
old, or fiat-podded type of Refugee, as several of Martens 
synonyms are given for both. 

Plant dwarf, rather tall, 1 ' ■> feet or more, erect, much 
branched, runnerless, very vigorous, early midseason. Foliage large, 
abundant, deep green. Flowers lilac. Pods long, 4 to 6 inches, 
with rather long tips, nearly circular in cross-section when young, 
later, broad, flattened light green often marked purplish or violet, 
becoming yellowish with age, stringy, fibrous in flattened stages, 
but crisp and tender when young. Seeds 6, about •' ^ inch long, 
hardly half as wide, not plump, oblong, or slightly kidney-shaped 
with rounded ends, very rarely compressed, russet or fawn soon 
changing to dark brown or almost black, spotted and splashed with 
red. 

Black Valentine. Refs. 30, 41, 48, 49, 77, 88, 91. 

Syns. Black Seeded Valentine, French String, King of 
the Earlies, King of the Earliest, May Queen. The 
name Valentine seems to have been in common usage 
for varieties of garden beans, yet in no case is the origin 
of the particular sort which was chosen to bear the name 
known. In 1897 Peter Henderson 8s Company intro- 
duced two new beans, Black Valentine, which according 
to Tracy may have been only a return of an old bean 
of that name known before 1850, and Cream Valentine. 
No explanation as to source or origin of either was noted. 
Black Valentine seems to be the only black seeded green- 
pod bean that has continued as a popular variety. 
Denaiffe lists ten green-podded varieties having black 
seeds, none of which are in usage in this country. 

Black Valentine is widely grown, especially in the 
South, as a shipping bean, probably grown more than 
its quality merits, altho if a stringless type becomes 
available, this feature, together with its hardiness and 
rather attractive pods will again warrant its retention 
as a leading variety. It is not a home garden or canning 
variety because of the black seed which develops color 
quite early. It is a second early, 49 days at Geneva, 
coming 3 to 5 days after the very earliest sorts such as 
Bountiful and Stringless Greenpod. 

The pod characters resemble Longfellow, altho pods 
are longer, flatter, and more perfect in shape and with 
more parchment. The color of seed is different. Foliage 
of Black Valentine is darker than Red Valentine, and 
is of more open growth, the pods appearing more above 
the foliage, but the plants are neither more erect nor 
taller. 

Plant medium in size, from 12 to 14 inches tall with a spread 
of 1 foot or slightly better; erect, rather open in habit, runnerless: 
vigor only fair, but very hardy, moderately productive, pods borne 
rather high. Stem heavy, round, smooth, short internodes; branches 




ri'atural size 



BLACK VALENTINE 



o 



EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 



l| 




f\ 



FULL MEASURE 



I) 




DWARF GREEN PODS 



(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



37 



few. no secondaries, mostly green but occasionally slightly purplish 
tinged at nodes on stem and blossom stalks. Foliage scanty 
accentuated because of open habit of growth, medium green; 
leaflets slightly rough and crumpled, thin, rather than thick, very 
light pubescence, rather small to above medium, 3'.j inches long 
by about 2 1 •> inches wide, widest ' 4 distance from base, distinctly 
taper pointed, lateral leaflets quite one-sided, Flowers rose purple. 
Pods borne above foliage, light green (Kildare green) in color. 
Quality rather poor, as pods are stringy, quite fibrous and tough. 
Size medium long, narrow, quite plump, i 5-6 ' > x ? j x iV -3 8 inches), 
and containing 6-7 seeds in a pod. Shape round, nearly circular 
in cross-section, very slightly curved, straight backed, regular, not 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip, and rounded at the end. Spur 
short and straight. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, obtuse. 
Seeds small, 1.3 x .7 x .5 cm (,102 per oz.), oval to oblong, occasionally 
somewhat reniform; plump, trunca e or abruptly rounded ends. 
Hilum small, flat, or slightly indented. Color shining jet black 
over entire surface. 

Blood Speckled. Refs. 47, 93, 94. This old 
bean was probably little known in America but was 
grown and tested at Geneva and the Missouri Botanical 
Garden. In Paris markets it was very popular until 
1906 as a dry shell bean. For snap pods it is tough, 
and altho excellent as green shells, it is used mostly as 
a dry shell bean. 

Plant with many short barren runners. Pods long, straight, 
rather slender, constricted, short-tipped, green often striped purplish. 
Seeds 5 or 6, longer and much broader and more flattened than those 
of Valentine, but somewhat similarly marked: — according to Wing, 
light brown or dun color, almost entirely covered with dark red 
(in blotches and streaks i, the two colors sharply separated with 
a yellowish brown eye-ring. 

Boston Market. Refs. 27. Salzer is said to have 
introduced this variety in 1891. As described by the 
Michigan Station it appears to be a very early, very 
small-bushed, short, curved-podded, stringless Valentine, 
picking over a very long season, but not very productive 
because of small plants and small pods. 

Bountiful. Refs. 41, 48, 50, 53, 73, 77, 91, 99. 
Syns. Breck's Boston Snap, Improved Six Weeks, Sutton's 
Plentiful. During the late 90's it was the practice of 
certain of the larger seed companies to introduce each 
year a few new varieties and offer prizes for appro- 
priate names. Thru this agency Peter Henderson in 
1898, offered twenty-five dollars as a cash premium 
for the best name sent in for New Green Bush Bean 
No. 1. Abel Steele of Ferguson, Ontario, won the 
first prize with the name Bountiful. This variety, 
therefore was introduced in 1898 and named Bountiful 
the following year. Henderson secured the seed from 
D. G. Burlingame of Genesee, New York. It was said 
to be a selection from Long Yellow Six Weeks, certainly 
its general resemblance to this variety would support 
this belief. For its type it is not approached by any 
other variety, in season, vigor, productiveness, appear- 
ance, and quality. 

The early history of Bountiful shows it to have 
been recommended chiefly as a home garden variety. 
Its rise as a commercial sort has been rather slow, 
but since 1920 it has forged ahead of all other greenpod 
beans for market use. It is now acknowledged to be the 
earliest and best in quality of the strictly stringless flat 
podded sorts. It can be planted early or late and 



because the pods remain in good condition for a long 
time after picking it has become very popular as a 
variety to grow for shipment. 

At Geneva 47 to 50 days to the first picking; as 
early as Tennessee Green Pod or Black Valentine and 
about 3 days earlier than Full Measure, Stringless 
Greenpod or Long Yellow Six Weeks, 10 days earlier 
than Refugee. While Bountiful was selected from 
Long Yellow Six Weeks, it differs from that variety in 
lighter color of foliage, earlier, larger, straighter pods, 
and superior quality. Grenell Stringless is later in 
season and has darker foliage. 

Plant strictly dwarf, medium to large, 15 to 18 inches high 
with spread of from 12 to 18 inches, quite bushy, medium erect 
when young, rather straggly when fully grown. Plant appears to 
be top heavy, after heavy rains or winds it is liable to appear pros- 
trate and cover quite a spread in row; very vigorous, hardy, heavily 
productive over a long season. Stem stout, round, ridged above, 
internodes long; branches few, slender, green thruout. Foliage 
abundant, leaves large in size, very light green in color, in field 
appeared as having the lightest green foliage of all bush sorts; 
leaflets smooth to very slightly rough, medium thick, sometimes 
slightly wrinkled, older leaves crumpled, 4' 4 ' to 4 3 4 inches long, 
2 J g to 3 l 2 inches wide, at one-fourth or less distance from base to tip, 
sides tapering regularly or with slight out curve to rather sharp tip 
three-fourths inch long. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne both above and below foliage, light yellowish 
green (light dull green yellow) in color. Quality excellent; brittle, 
stringless, with small amount of fiber and fine texture. Size medium 
to long, quite broad and medium slender to plump, (6-7 x } o x 3 g 
inches i, containing 6—7 seeds per pod. Shape medium flat to round, 
long to broad oval in cross-section, straight to slightly curved, 
straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip 
and edge, and pointed or tapering at the end. Spur long, slender 
and curved. Suture, placental is flat to slightly indented, and car- 
pellary, broadly acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.4 x .8 x .6 cm (65 per oz.) oblong, somewhat 
reniform, plump, with abruptly rounded ends. Hilum small, 
flat. Color fawn when first harvested changing to dark dull straw 
yellow (cinnamon) as it ages. A distinct darker brown, narrow 
eye-ring is always present. 

Brown Holland. Refs. 47. Ascribed by name to 
Holland in the first reference we find this is apparently 
of European origin. It approaches very closely the 
earlier Stringless Green Pod types (see Irish). Early and 
very productive. 

Plant 5 6 to 1 foot tall, with many branches. Foliage light 
green, rough but not wrinkled, with very large leaflets. Flowers 
white, often blushed. Pods 4 to 4 ' _> inches long, occasionally 
5 inches, half-inch broad or less, smooth, slender, approaching 
cylindrical, slightly curved, fleshy, swollen over beans, stringy, 
tough soon, light green becoming pale yellow. Seeds 4-5, ' j to 
b /% inch long, more than half as wide, ovate oblong, often almost 
kidney-shaped, with rounder, or occasionally truncate ends; very 
dark dirt brown, with darker eye-ring. 

Burpee's Stringless Green Pod. Refs. 11,30,35, 
36, 41, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 59, 62, 69, 77, 87, 91, 99. 
Syns. Bell's Prolific Green Pod, McKenzie's Matchless 
Stringless Green Pod, Prolific Green Pod, Schultz's 
Stringless Greenpod, Stringless Forcer, Stringless Green 
Round Pod, Stringless Wonder. This bean was intro- 
duced in 1894 by W. Atlee Burpee and originated with 
N. B. Keeney who claimed it to be the only absolutely 
stringless green podded bean on the market. Since its 
introduction it has retained its name as originally offered 



38 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



until recently when many seedsmen have the variety 
listed as Stringless Green Pod. Burpee's Stringless 
Greenpod gradually became one of the leading sorts. 
It was followed by Bountiful in 1899, Giant Stringless 
Green Pod in 1898, and Stringless Refugee in 1904. 
These four are today the leading stringless green podded 
varieties. Stringless Green Pod, offered by Thorburn, 
1898, was undoubtedly the same stock as Burpee's 
Stringless Green Pod. 

What is the parentage of this the first stringless 
green podded variety? A letter from the originator, 
N. B. Keeney, published in Burpee's catalog of 1894 is 
our only source of information. We quote therefrom: 
" It (Burpee's Stringless Greenpod) is the result of 
five years of careful work combining the desirable 
qualities of the Yosemite Mammoth Wax, Burpee's 
Saddleback Wax, and Ne Plus Ultra, and it is our best 
selection out of over two hundred varieties. It gets its 
round pod and stringlessness from Yosemite and Saddle- 
back, and its long, straight, handsome green pod from 
the Ne Plus Ultra." No other details are available. 
Only by comparing characters as now found in Stringless 
Greenpod with those of Yosemite, Saddleback Wax and 
Ne Plus Ultra can one surmise as to the possible direc- 
tion of the crossing if any. 

Irish makes Stringless Green Pod (from Thorburn) a 
sub-variety of Brown Holland which he describes in some 
detail, and Denaiffe notes its similarity to that variety. 
Certainly Stringless Greenpod is an improvement over 
Brown Holland in its pod characters. More than a 
dozen strains of Stringless Greenpod have been grown in 
recent tests, under the original name, known and 
unknown synonyms. Considerable difference was noted, 
and comparison with the same or other strains grown 
elsewhere showed even wider ranges in size and shape of 
pods and seeds as well as height of plant ; yet it is believed 
that all names given in our synonyms apply to varieties 
so similar in useful qualities that they may be considered 
identical. Stringless Green-pod is an early, hardy, 
productive variety profitable for both home and market. 
It is used to some extent by the canner but in general 
the pods are too thick and large; the variety passes thru 
the canning stage rather rapidly, develops a large promi- 
nent seed rather quickly and therefore is not suitable 
to the majority of canners. 

This is an early bean 46 days to edible pod at 
Geneva, 3 days earlier than Full Measure, about the 
same in season as Bountiful and Tennessee Green Pod, 
and 10 to 12 days earlier than Stringless Refugee. It is, 
earlier than Giant Stringless Green Pod but has shorter, 
thicker and more curved pods, which are more constricted 
between seeds. The seeds are much darker in color and 
the pods are not as attractive but are as good in quality. 
Byers has pods which are longer and straighter and 
plants which are larger and more vigorous. Plants of 
Stringless Green Pod are more open in growth habit 
than those of Full Measure or Byers. 

These varieties differ from Burpee's Stringless Green- 
pod; Adams Stringless, Giant Stringless, Grenell String- 
less Green Pod, Hodson Stringless Green Pod, Jones 



Stringless, Prolific Stringless Green Pod, Stringless 
Refugee, Barteldes Stringless Green Pod. 

Plants strictly dwarf, 12 to 15 inches tall, 12 to 15-inch spread 
in row: stocky, erect when young, somewhat more spreading w.th 
weight of pods; somewhat open with few blossom stalks appearing 
above plant: hardy, vigorous, productive over moderate bearing 
period. Stem thick, ridged above; branches few. green thruout. 
Foliage scanty to medium, medium green; slightly rough, not 
glossy, with slight fine pubescence; leaflets broad, about 4 inches 
long and 3 inches wide near base, extending almost straight to 
short taper-pointed tips. Flowers lilac. 

Pods borne very largely high among the foliage, medium dark 
waxy green in color. Quality excellent; fleshy, extremely brittle, 
without fiber and entirely stringless. Size medium to short, fairly 
broad and thick, i3' £-5 x ys x 3 > inches) and containing 4-6 seeds in 
a pod. Shape very broad oval to nearly circular in cross-section, 
slightly curved, straight -backed, somewhat constricted, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and somewhat tapering at the 
end. Spur medium long, fairly stout and somewhat curved. Suture, 
placental is slightly indented and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds medium 1.4 x .8 x .7 cm i 75 per oz. > broad oval to 
cylindrical, very plump but not quite circular in cross-section, 
rounded and occasionally truncate ends. Hilum small, flattened. 
Color fawn or buff to dark brown argus brown 1 over entire surface 
with a narrow dark brown to black eye-ring. 

Byers. Refs. 41, 48, 88, 91. Byer Bros, of 
Tennessee in 1897 sent out test samples of a new bean 
found in their fields. Two years later it was introduced 
by Childs as a very promising new stringless greenpod. 
It is still offered by this firm and by no other as far as 
we have been able to ascertain. It is considered a good 
home garden bean because of high quality and long 
season. It also has possibilities as a market bean. 
Midseason, 50 days at Geneva, 4 to 5 days later than 
Bountiful, 3 to 4 days later than Stringless Greenpod, 
2 days later than Full Measure. 

The seed resembles seed of Full Measure and Pride 
of Iowa in color and markings. The seed markings 
also resemble those of Refugee but with more brown 
color. The pods are longer and more irregular in size 
than pods of Stringless Greenpod and Full Measure; 
are straighter but with the same characteristic inch 
markings and are more of a glossy green than the pods 
of Giant Stringless Greenpod. The plants are more 
branching with foliage more dense and leaflets narrower 
and smaller than both those of Stringless Greenpod and 
Full Measure. 

Plant large, 15 to 18 inches tall, with spread of 16 inches; 
erect when young, but later when plants are older and loaded with 
pods often somewhat drooping, runnerless; vigorous growth, very 
productive over long bearing period. Stem stout, round, ridged 
above; branches many with secondaries, green thruout. Foliage 
abundant, dense, medium green, slightly crumpled, smooth, glossy, 
medium thick; leaflets rather long, 4'^ by 3' 4 inches wide. Flowers 
blush pink. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; medium light 
green in color. Quality good to excellent; fleshy, brittle, tender, 
but rather coarse in texture, stringless, without parchment. Size 
medium long, fairly broad and very plump, 1 5-6 x . . x 
inches 1, containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly circular 
to very broad cordate in cross-section, straight, often creasebacked, 
regular, quite crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and gently 
rounded at the end. Spur long, slender and slightly recurved. 
Suture, placental is indented and carpellary, decidedly rounded. 

Seeds medium large, 1.4 x .6 x .55 cm, (68-70 per oz. . Shape 
medium long, cylindrical, very plump, very broad oval to nearly 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



39 



circular in cross-section: ends very abruptly rounded to truncate. 

Hilum small and flattened. Color deep buff pinkish cinnamon to 

orange cinnamon under color, mottled and splashed over the 

greater portion of the surface with varying shades of deep reddish 

brown bay and auburn . 

Canadian Express. Refs. 53. This variety was 
introduced by Carter sometime before 1925, as coming 
from a Sunrise x Canadian Wonder cross. It is both 
earlier and more productive than Canadian Wonder. 

Pods very long, 6 ] j to "'_> inches, almost straight, slender, 
rather flat, very long-tipped, green, crisp and tender when young, 
slightly stringy later: seeds one-fourth smaller than those of 
Canadian Wonder, slender but fairly plump, very long oval with 
eye-side straight, very rarely kidney-shaped, rich crimson purple 
or purplish maroon, darker than Canadian Wonder, darker eye-ring 
hardly noticeable. 

Chalandray. This is an old French variety, 
grown for half a century as a forcing bean; it is also, as 
Superb Early Forcing, grown in England for the same 
purpose. Chalandray was tested and described at 
Geneva and at the Missouri Botanical Garden; listed 
by Thorburn and described by Tracy and Jarvis as 
Veitch's Forcing. 

Plant very dwarf and compact with small, long bright green 
leaflets, somewhat blistered and curled. Pods medium in length 
but variable, slightly curved, almost round in cross-section, long- 
tipped, fleshy, green, much like those of Wonder of France, but 
considerably swollen over the beans. Seeds medium-sized, about 
130 to the ounce, short broad oval or slightly ovate, usually some- 
what flattened but occasionally nearly round in cross-section, with 
short-rounded ends, not truncate, yellowish brown, sometimes 
lighter at one end and often with greenish iines along the sutures. 

Chevrier. Refs. 53. Syn. Chevrier Vert. This 
selection from Green Flageolet originated about 1878 at 
Bretigny, just south of Paris, with the market gardener 
whose name it bears. It was commercially distributed 
in 1880 and soon became very popular around Paris. 
It was grown at this Station in 1883, but seems not to 
have been regularly listed until 1894. Chevrier is not 
quite as hardy or disease-resistant as Wonder of France, 
which followed it. The pods, except when very small, 
are of poor quality, tough and stringy. 

It differs from White Flageolet, and its earlier green-seeded 
strain. Green Flageolet, mainly in a marked intensification of the 
green pigmentation, extending to all parts of the plant but horti- 
culturally important in pods and seeds. It appears to be most 
reliable of all the green-seeded beans in this respect; altho in the 
early tests at this Station the green of the seeds showed faintly or 
not at ai!, probably because of delayed harvesting. Usually the 
green extends through the cotyledons and imparts a fine color to 
the cooked beans. 

Cholet. Refs. 51. Vilmorin introduced Cholet 
shortly before it was brought to America by Henderson 
in 1907. The Royal Horticultural Society gave it the 
" highest award " in 1910. It is similar to Early 
Refugee in foliage color, leaf characters and roundness 
of pod. 

Plant dwarf, compact, vigorous; foliage dark green; leaflets 
small, pointed; flowers pale blush. Pods 4 to 6 inches long, slender, 
light green, soon stringy. Seeds long, very pale dun or chamois 
color. 

Cream Valentine. Refs. 48, 49, 88, 91. This was 
a selection from Red Valentine, originated in Genesee 
County, N. Y., and introduced in 1897 by Henderson. 



Pods of medium size I4 3 4 ' inches longl curved, round in cross- 
section or broader than thick, strongly crease-backed, medium 
green, very brittle, stringy but almost fiberless and of good quality. 
Seeds 5 or 6 crowded in pod, pinkish cream with faintly darker eye- 
ring. Apparently more like Long Yellow Six Weeks than like 
Valentine in size and shape, but lighter in color and decidedly 
truncate at ends. 

Dun-colored. Refs. 13. 16, 41. 47, 61, 63, 
97, 98. The varieties, Dark and Light Dun-Colored, 
trace back about as far as any of which we have record, 
one of the varieties listed by Mawe-Abercrombie in 
1778 undoubtedly being the ancestor of Dark Dun, 
from which the form with lighter-colored seeds was 
later derived. They were grown in America from 1828 
at least, but are now of historical interest only. 

Plants rather tall dwarfs, bushy and vigorous, with large, 
light green wrinkled foliage, purplish blossoms. Pods short, 
almost straight, slender but nearly round, light green but with 
a peculiar striated appearance. Seeds 4-5, large, -fs inch long, 
broadly oblong, with truncated ends or slightly kidney shaped, 
slate drab or dun color, changing to dark brown, with almost 
black eye-ring. 

Dwarf Caseknife. Refs. 13, 29, 47, 49, 51, 53, 
93, 94. Syn. Dwarf Cimiter, Dwarf Early White 
Scimitar, Dwarf Sabre, Emperor William. First in 
Market, Rhode Island Caseknife. The name Dwarf 
Caseknife is here used to cover a large group of names 
applying to a rather distinct type of bean, the socalled 
varieties being either identical, making the names 
strictly synonyms, or so similar as to be inseparable. 
The name was first applied about 1865 to Dwarf Sabre 
or Dwarf Cimiter as mentioned by Burr. Henderson 
in 1892 offered Rhode Island Dwarf Caseknife and in 
1904 Kendal gave the name to Emperor William, a 
variety coming from Germany and known since 1880. 
The type originally came from France and because of its 
large white seeds was early used as a shell bean or as a 
dry one for winter use. The pods are unattractive and 
not suited for use as snaps; plants rather scraggly in 
growth. White Kidney has replaced Dwarf Caseknife 
for the production of the larger sized white dry shell 
beans. 

Plant about 10 inches tall, spreading, not twining; leaflets of 
medium size, broadly wedge-shaped, occasionally heart-shaped, 
rather dark green, not inclined to wrinkle. Flowers white. Pods 
light greenish yellow, straight or nearly so, swollen by the beans, 
with slender, moderately long curved tips, about 5 1 J inches long, 
1 2 to 3 4 inch wide, broadly ovate, becoming more flattened at 
maturity. Seeds 3 or 4, polished white when ripe, slightly more than 
one-half inch long, about two thirds as wide, and less than one- 
half as thick, decidedly flattened, broad, oblong. 

Dwarf Early Flcuriel. When grown at Geneva in 
1888, this variety proved to be late, subject to mildew, 
short -podded, and unproductive. Vilmorin says it is 
early and more productive than Canada Yellow. 

Plant very dwarf, very compact, much branched, with finely 
blistered foliage and white flowers. Pods about 4 inches long, 
much curved, about ] 2 inch wide, entirely fiberless, Vilm. I. Seeds 
of medium size, very short oval, very pale yellowish brown with 
white or brown eye-ring. 

Dwarf Russian. Refs. 47, 93, 94, 97, 98. Vil- 
morin introduced Dwarf Russian before 1882, but the 
name indicates a foreign origin. It was quite popular in 



40 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



France, having been listed in that country for thirty 
years. 

Plant rather tall, vigorous, not early, but productive, with 
long, nearly straight, broad pods, approaching cylindrical, rather 
short-tipped, fleshy, not much swollen by beans, soon stringy and 
parchmented, light green to pale yellow; usually more or less splashed 
with purple. Seeds very large, broad-oblong or very long ovate, 
tobacco brown with darker eye-ring, without gloss and seed coat 
very dull, almost rough, distinct from all others of the type. 

Dwarf Soissons. Refs. 13, 28, 47, 51, 56, 93, 94. A 

variety that is very similar to the Dwarf Caseknife 
group. Wing and others use the name as a synonym 
for names in that group, but Vilmorin, Martens and 
Denaiffe make it distinct, the separatory characters 
being taller plants, more productive, of shorter pods, 
one less seed to the pod, smaller, plumper seeds and later 
in season. 

Early Refugee. Refs. 5, 9, 16, 26, 29, 30, 48, 49. 
59, 61, 77, 80, 81, 91. Syns. Early one-Thousand-to-one, 
Excelsior, Extra Early Refugee, Excelsior Refugee, 
Pages Extra Early. In Annals or Horticulture 1891 
(Bailey) Early Refugee is said to have been introduced 
by Henderson. Both Tracy and Jarvis credit Thorburn 
with its introduction in 1888 with the added information 
that it was developed by a market gardener in the 
vicinity of New York after continuous selection from 
Refugee. It is similar to Red Valentine; a good shipper 
and is used somewhat for canning altho for that purpose 
Stringless Refugee is the better suited. At Geneva 50 
days to first pods, 4 to 5 days later than earliest varieties 
but about ten days earlier than Stringless Refugee. 

Early Refugee differs from Refugee in several 
important respects: the plants are more dwarf, usually 
1 foot or less tall, heavier, more erect, stems much 
branched but runnerless, making a very compact bushy 
growth with the foliage slightly darker; pods shorter, 
more crease-backed, slightly more curved with longer 
tips; seeds are perhaps a shade darker. The pods 
are also similar to those of Red Valentine but longer, 
more slender, with a slight amount of purple splashing 
at shell stage, and the point is more curved. 

Plant similar to plants of Refugee but smaller, not as pro- 
ductive nor as long in season. Pods borne below foliage; light 
moderately waxy green in color. Quality good; very brittle, 
some string, quite fiberless and fine in texture. Size medium long, 
quite narrow and plump (3J£-4J^ x :; ,- ' _> x N-'j inches) con- 
taining 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly circular in cross- 
section, slightly curved, straight backed or slightly crease-backed, 
regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and rounded 
on the end. Spur long, slender and recurved. Suture, placental 
is slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse to rounded. 

Seeds medium, 1.4 x .6 x .55 cm (90-95 per oz.), oblong, nearly 
cylindrical, very plump; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. Hilum 
small, flat. Color very dark bluish-black or purple (dusky violet 
blue i instead of the lighter shade of purple as in Refugee, splashed 
and mottled over the entire surface with pale buff (pale pinkish 
cinnamon.) 

Eclair. A foreign variety which was brought to 
this country by Thorburn in 1904 and which was distinct 
from the variety known as Lightning, which is the 
English equivalent of the French name. According to 
Thorburn the originator, who is unknown, said it was 
the earliest of all dwarf snap beans, or more than two 



weeks ahead of White Lyonnaise, which it resembles 
in its very long, slender, round, fleshy, stringless green 
pods. 

Emile. Refs. 97, 98. Perrier originated this old 
French variety shortly before 1880; its short pods 
prevented it from becoming one of the leading green- 
pod snap and green-shell beans. It was grown at this 
Station and at the Missouri Botanical Garden, where 
Irish considered it the same as Osborn, a very similar 
English variety. It was also listed commercially in 
America but apparently never grown as much as its 
merits would seem to warrant. It was very early, 
very productive, and its pods held their attractive green 
color over a long period. 

Plant very dwarf, without runners or twining habit. Foliage 
abundant, dark green; leaflets of medium size, broadly obovate, 
taper pointed, somewhat curled. Flowers blush pink. Pods green, 
not marked purplish, rarely over 4 inches long, stocky, round in 
cross-section, somewhat swollen by seeds, thick-fleshed, stringless 
and fiberless, of fine quality. Seeds 5 or 6, rather more than half- 
an-inch long, half as wide, oblong, only slightly tapering toward one 
end, ends well rounded, mottled, dark chocolate purple over light 
brown, like Mohawks in color, but much broader in proportion to 
length. 

Everbearing. Refs. 48, 50, 51, 91. This is a 
French bean of the Flageolet type introduced there in 
1897 by Vilmorin and into America in 1899 by Burpee. 
In France, where snap pods are used very early, this 
bean soon became popular; but in America the variety 
cannot be used for string beans since the pods are tough 
and stringy at the size we harvest them. It was con- 
sidered a fair quality green-shell bean, but quite inferior 
to many other varieties of this type. It soon disappeared 
from cultivation in this country. 

Plant very much like that of Dwarf Caseknife but character- 
ized by production of late flowers in clusters high above the foliage. 
Leaflets rather longer and narrower. Pods shorter, more slender 
and thinner. Seeds smaller and not as broad, somewhat 
kidney-shaped. 

Feltham Prolific. Refs. 53. This is a variety 
that was introduced by Watkins & Simpson, London, 
England (trial grounds at Feltham), in 1919, and reached 
America in 1921. 

It is almost identical with Magpie, but an improvement on 
that variety in having pods more slender, less stringy and fibrous 
and not showing seeds until long past string bean stage. Smaller 
in every way than Magpie. Plant shorter; leaflets a little finer. 
Pods shorter and more slender; almost straight. Seeds smaller, 
usually square at ends thru crowding in pods, marked white and 
brown (sudan) instead of white and black, the color being dis- 
tributed as in Magpie. 

Flageolet Victoria. Refs. 49, 50. Tho bearing 
the name Flageolet, that of a French group of beans, 
this variety apparently did not originate in France, 
since Denaiffe said that it had not been adopted in his 
country. It was introduced into America in 1894, by 
Henderson, who listed it only three years. Afterwards 
Thorburn carried it for three or four years, but it never 
became very popular. 

Plants about 1 ' | feet tall, very vigorous, with " enormous " 
leaves. Flowers white. Pods very long, 5 ' ■> to 6 inches, occasion- 
ally 8 to 10 inches, flat, nearly straight, with long, slender tips. 
green, quite fleshy, swollen by beans, but soon stringy and fibrous. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



41 



suitable for market but not home use; good shippers. Seeds 
usually 5, very large, s ± inch long, ' ■_> inch wide, more than ' 1 inch 
thick, decidedly broad kidney-shaped with indented hilum; white, 
strikingly marked about eye with purplish " butterfly " markings, 
soon becoming almost black. 

Fordhook Favorite. Refs. 53. Syn. White Seeded 
Stringless Greenpod. John W. Daily of Falling Waters, 
West Virginia, found a plant bearing pods with white 
seeds in a bed of brown seeded Burpee's Stringless 
Greenpod in 1903. Starting with ten beans, he increased 
the stock and in March of 1906 sent a sample to Burpee's. 
In 1910 it was offered as a novelty as " White-seeded 
Stringless Greenpod " and sold in sealed packets, 30 
seeds for fifteen cents. Prizes were offered for the best 
Postal Card Reports, and in 1911 the name was changed 
to Burpee's Fordhook Favorite. 

In general usage this variety is quite similar to 
Stringless Greenpod altho the white seed bestows an 
advantage in that it may be used as a dry shell bean. 
A good all round variety with large, round, plump pods, 
ready in 48 to 50 days, closely following the very earliest; 
3 to 4 days later than Stringless Greenpod or about the 
same in season as Full Measure, Black and Red Valen- 
tine. Fordhook Favorite closely resembles Stringless 
Greenpod in plant characters, but the pods are shorter 
and more fleshy. 

Plant medium to large, 14 to 18 inches tall, with a spread 
of about 15 inches in the row; erect but somewhat scraggly and 
open, without runners; vigor fair, moderate in yield, over fairly 
long season. Stem stout, round, smooth with short internodes; 
branches few, with some secondary branches, green thruout. Foli- 
age scanty to medium, medium green, not glossy, rough, crumpled, 
slightly wrinkled, moderately thick, with rather heavy veining; 
leaflets large, 4 ' 2 inches long by 3 ] 2 inches wide, widest one-quarter 
distance from base, sides sloping gradually to broad short point. 
Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light silvery 
green in color. Quality good; practically stringless, brittle, small 
amount of fiber, and of fine texture. Size medium long, quite 
broad and plump (4J £-6 x ! j x ft inches), containing 4-6 seeds per 
pod. Shape round, broad oval in cross-section, curved, straight- 
backed to slightly crease-backed, somewhat constructed, not 
crowded, quite smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge, and 
pointed at the end. Spur short, stout and straight. Suture, 
placental is slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium to large, quite variable, 1.4 x .8 x .7 cm, (55-90 
per oz. I, oval, sub-reniform, plump; well rounded ends. Hilum 
small, protuberant. Color ivory white, indistinctly marked, with 
a grayish vein-like system that shows thru the seed coat. 

French Mohawk. Refs. 48, 91. This probably 
was of English origin, sometime before 1883. It was 
twice introduced into the United States, and was 
noteworthy for its long, straight pods. It is much like 
Mohawk, but makes a larger, coarser growth, and pro- 
duces pods which are much longer, and more slender. 
It is hardy and productive, but quite late. 

Plant 1 J 3 to l 2 v feet tall, very erect, and vigorous, with large, 
rough, green foliage. Flowers pink. Pods almost 8 inches long 
under good conditions, slender, almost straight, round-oval in 
cross-section, green splashed with purple, very tough, stringy and 
fibrous, poor in quality. Seeds -'3 to % inch long, slender, oval in 
cross-section, truncate or rounded at ends, deep bluish black, spar- 
ingly splashed pale buff. 

Full Measure. Refs. 11, 48, 69, 99. Syns. 
Perfection Stringless, Pride of Iowa, Prolific Stringless. 



Peter Henderson & Company first listed Full Measure 
in their catalog of 1906. It was said by them (cat. 1907) 
to have been developed from a cross between Yosemite 
Mammoth Wax and Refugee or 1000 to 1. This is a 
variety well suited for the home garden or for market 
use; classed as a second early, coming just after the 
Stringless Greenpods, 49-53 days at Geneva, about 
three days later than Bountiful. Full Measure most 
resembles Byers and Giant Stringless, the pods are more 
scimitar curved, shorter, with the characteristic inch 
marks found on pods of these varieties. The seeds are 
very similar to the seed of Byers. 

Plant 14-15 inches high, rigid with spread of 9—10 inches in 
row; stocky, erect when young, compact; often quite spreading 
when loaded with pods; vigorous, hardy, and moderately productive 
Stem very stout, round, ridged; branches few, green. Foliage 
medium abundant, dull medium green, slightly pubescent, thick, 
rough, crumpled, medium to heavy veining; leaflets above medium 
size, 5 inches long, 4 1 2 inches wide, broadest very near base, taper- 
ing uniformly to rather obscure point. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light green glass 
green i in color. Quality excellent, fleshy, brittle, stringless, quite 
fiberless and of fine texture. Size medium to long, moderately 
broad and quite plump, (5-6J-9 x ?s x ft-? s inches I, and con- 
taining 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly circular in cross- 
section, curved, occasionally scimitar shaped, slightly crease-backed, 
regular to somewhat constricted, smooth, not crowded, filled to the 
tip and edge, and pointed at the end. Spur long, medium slender 
and slightly curved. Suture, placental is indented and carpellary, 
rounded. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.7 x .7 x .65 cm, (65—70 per oz.) long 
oval to almost cylindrical occasionally sub-reniform, very plump; 
ends very abruptly rounded to truncate, Hilum small, flat. Color 
light buffy-brown (warm buff) mottled with darker brown (antique 
brown J of varying intensity with a pattern resembling Refugee; 
marked with a narrow tawny-yellow eye-ring. 

Fullmer. Refs. 63, 98. This was a very old 
English bean, possibly identical with Red Swiss or 
derived from it. It was grown at this Station the first 
year beans were tested, 1882; listed by Thorburn and in 
1888 was tested at the Kansas Station. Tho early and 
productive it never gained a place in popular favor, as 
the pods were too short for market. 

Plant l 1 ^ to lj> feet tall, stout, erect, with short runners; 
leaflets large, almost round, coursely wrinkled, dark green. Flowers 
pale violet. Pods 3 to 4 .'2 inches long, very fleshy, straight, dark 
green, stringy and fibrous. Seeds generally 4-5, slightly more than 
J-2 inch long, very broad oval or distinctly ovate, very plump, 
colored about like Red Valentine. 

Feejee. Refs. 10, 15, 47, 48, 91, 97, 98. Syns. 
Early Fegee, Lightning, White's Early. This bean, 
now known as Lightning, was cultivated in the middle 
of the past century as White's Early, the name Feejee 
being current for about thirty years from 1870 to 1900. 
It is now seldom grown in the United States, tho it was 
for a long time quite widely distributed. Feejee was 
considered a very early variety in America, where it was 
used for snaps and picked continuously in early stages 
over a long season; but held to be quite late in France 
where it was used for green shells. Wing's figures 
support both views, pods are ready among first but the 
beans mature with the late varieties. 

Plants very similar to those of Dwarf Caseknife, but with 
purplish pigment, giving color in stripes and patches to stems, 



42 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



branches, leaves, flowers and pods. Pods rather short in snap 
stage, 4 J 2 to 5 inches long later, rather rarely exceeding J •_> inch in 
width, flat, usually slightly curved, somewhat constricted, with 
short, stout, curved tips. Seeds oblong, quite strongly kidney- 
shaped, flattened sidewise, about \ -j inch long, nearly as broad, 
half as thick, varying in color, — from grayish white to mixed 
drab, slate and brown (Irish), from almost pure white to white 
mottled and streaked with various shades of dull blue and drab 
(Wing). Sometimes distinctly patterned by curved bands. 

Galega. Refs. 15, 16, 27, 48, 49, 81, 91, 97, 98. 
This variety was first known about 1880 and was quite 
popular for a time. It is a selection from Refugee and 
distinguishable from that variety only by being slightly 
larger in plant, foliage, pods and seeds. The pods were 
slightly curved backwards at the neck and decidedly 
more reddish and the seeds were of a darker shading 
making them apparently like Extra Early Refugee. 
The general plant characters and season were the same 
as for Refugee altho possibly it was a few days earlier, 
and somewhat more productive. 

Garden Pride. Refs. 48, 91. This variety was 
introduced in 1903 by A. N. Jones, LeRoy, N. Y., 
and was similar in habit and uses to the better known 
Fordhook Favorite of nearly a decade later. While 
it was rather productive of pods that were very excellent 
for use as snaps, they had the disadvantage of being 
rather poorly shaped. The seeds were considered rather 
small for green-shell beans. 

Plants and foliage about the same as those of Fordhook 
Favorite. Pods distinctly curved, sometimes almost S-shaped, 
narrower, more oval in cross-section, with long, curved tip. Seeds 
decidedly smaller than those of Favorite (short-oblong) but other- 
wise like them. 

Garland. Kendall and Whitney in introducing 
this as new in 1914 described it as a superior early shell 
bean, very productive and with seeds like those of Low's 
Champion but larger and longer. It was omitted from 
the introducer's catalog of 1918, and has not been listed 
by others. 

Giant Forcer. Refs. 91. Henry A. Dreer intro- 
duced Giant Forcer in 1906 and listed it for about nine 
years. It was very similar in appearance and usefulness 
to round-podded Best of All, altho smaller in plant and 
with seed of different color. 

Plant very large and spreading, but runnerless; leaflets 
very large, dark green, with very rough surface. Flowers light 
pink. Pods variable, but properly very long, over seven inches, 
straight, round-oval in cross-section, stringy but brittle and with 
little fiber, medium green in color, sparingly splashed with faint red 
in green-shell stage. Seeds 6-8 crowded in pod, small to medium, 
roundish oval in cross-section, well rounded at ends, straight or 
slightly rounded at eye, pale buff, sparingly splashed with fawn. 

Giant Stringless Green Pod. Refs. 11, 41, 48, 
50, 69, 77, 91, 99. Syns. Bell's Giant Stringless Green 
Pod, Colossal Stringless Greenpod, English Stringless, 
Giant Podded, Giant Stringless Green Pod Valentine, 
Improved Stringless Green Pod, Mammoth String- 
less Green Pod, Newington Wonder, Norwood Stringless. 

This popular bean was originated by N. B. Keeney 
& Son, LeRoy, N. Y. and introduced in 1898 by Johnson 
and Stokes as Giant Stringless Greenpod Valentine. 
It was said to have been a selection from Red Valentine, 
but if so, it would seem as tho the plants came in the 



field through mechanical mixture. Just what the par- 
entage was must remain unknown. It could well have 
had hybrid origin from any one of the many varieties 
grown at that time. 

Giant Stringless Greenpod is about the same in 
usefulness as Stringless Greenpod, it is valuable either 
for a home or market garden variety where a good quality 
round green pod is desired. It has the good qualities 
necessary for packing high quality cut beans. The 
color in the seed coat develops fairly early and there 
is considerable constriction between seeds as the pods 
get older. At Geneva this was an early variety 47 to 
48 days to the first picking, not more than 2 or 3 days 
later than Stringless Greenpod and from 1 to 2 days 
earlier than Full Measure. The pods are larger, 
longer, straighter, with the characteristic inch marks 
more prominent than with Burpee's Stringless Greenpod. 
It is quite similar in general characteristics to Full 
Measure and Byers. 

Plant resembles those of Burpee's Stringless Green Pod except 
as noted: slightly larger, with fewer, longer and more straggling 
branches, foliage rather coarser and lighter in color. Flowers lilac. 
Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; medium dull green in 
color. Quality excellent, very brittle, entirely stringless, without 
fiber or parchment and medium fine in texture. Size long, rathtr 
narrow, and fairly plump (6-7 x 'jx J s inches), containing 6-7 seeds 
per pod. Shape round, nearly circular in cross-section, slightly 
curved, straight backed, somewhat constricted, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and pointed or tapering on the 
end. Spur medium long, stout, and slightly curved. Suture, 
placental is flat to rounded and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.4 x .7 x .55 cm, (70-75 per oz.) oval to 
cylindrical, occasionally sub-reniform, rounded to somewhat trun- 
cate ends. Hilum small, flat. Color light brown tinted ochre 
yellow (ochraceous-orange) distinctly a lighter shade than Burpee's 
Stringless; inconspicuous, darker brown-olivaceous narrow eye-ring 
present. 

Golden Refugee. Refs. 16, 48, 61, 80, 84, 91. 

This was a selection from Refugee and was introduced 
in 1884, apparently by both Henderson and Thorburn. 
It was carried for a few years, with only a limited dis- 
tribution by others and then dropped. In most trials 
it was a few days earlier than Refugee, rather less viny 
and stouter -stemmed, with lighter -colored foliage and 
decidedly light green, almost white pods, similar to 
those of Crystal Wax, which led canners to call it Silver 
Refugee. The maize yellow and metallic brown of its 
smaller seeds gave it the more common name, Golden 
Refugee. As it was less productive and considered less 
hardy, it did not displace the parent variety. 

Gray-seeded. Refs. 47, 98. This sort was one 
of the earliest snap beans grown at the Station in 1883 
and was included in the Missouri Botanical Garden tests 
in 1901. No other American references to it have been 
found, altho Denaiffe says it was of American origin. 
Altho early it was neither productive nor good in quality. 

Plant strictly dwarf, under a foot, small to medium, leaflets 
very broad, smooth, deep green. Flowers white. Pods grayish 
white (pearly white-Wing) with green sutures often with purplish 
markings, 3 to 4' 2 inches long, J 2 inch wide or less, curved, slightly 
flattened. Seeds like those of Taylor Green Pod in shape, not 
quite as large, yellowish or reddish brown, or brownish drab with 
veiny markings, with darker red ring around eye. 




GIANT STRINGLESS GREEN POD 








ROGERS STRINGLESS REFUGEE 




BURPEE'S STRINGLESS GREEN POD 




V •- 



FORDHOOK FAVORITE 



DWARF GREEN PODS 



'Natural sLze> 




GREEN GEM 





> 









FIRST EARLY 



19 



DWARF GREEN PODS 



i Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



43 



Gray Succession. This was a French variety 
that was grown at this Station in 1888, found to be 
intermediate in season, and productive of long, slender 
green pods that were not of high quality. 

Plant 1 foot tall, with rather erect branches, deep green, 
roughened and blistered foliage, and pale purple flowers. Pods 
6 to 7 inches long, slender, generally much curved, stringy and 
fibrous, green. Seeds 6 or 7, medium to large, oblong or slightly 
kidney-shaped, heavily marked blackish purple over dirty white. 

Green-seeded Flageolet. Refs. 15, 16, 48, 49, 

63, 97. This bean is one of the oldest known varieties 
grown in France, having green-tinted, slightly to much 
flattened, plump to slender, kidney shaped seeds. In 
France it is known as Flageolet a Grain Vert and as 
such has been known since before 1860. It probably 
originated as an accidental variation or sport from 
White Flageolet, from which it differs in points dis- 
tinguishable only by careful study of foliage, pods, and 
with seeds showing an increase in green pigment. The 
pods soon become too stringy to make it an acceptable 
snap bean; but the green beans are of fine flavor, and 
attractive color when cooked or canned. 

Plants as described under Triumph of the Frames. Pods 
borne well above foliage, dark dull green in color. Quality poor; 
decidedly stringy, fibrous, medium tough but rather fine in texture. 
Size short to medium, narrow and slender i4 I 4 — 5 x J j— rV x J^ inches), 
containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape oval to flat, ovate thru cross- 
section, moderately curved, straight backed, regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and is rounded at the end. Spurs 
long, moderately stout and curved. Suture, placental is rounded 
to flat and carpellary, obtuse. Seeds small to medium, 1.7 x .6 x 
.4 cm, 1 160 per oz.) long reniform, somewhat flattened; rounded or 
somewhat truncate at the ends. Hilum flat to very slightly pro- 
tuberant. Color greenish white (water green) over entire surface 
and marked with a darker shaded, vein-like under pattern. 

Green Soissons. Refs. 47. Mons. Bonneman is 
credited with originating this variety in 1894, in which 
year it was introduced by Vilmorin. Tho described by 
Irish, it does not appear to have been grown commercially 
in the United States. 

Plants only slightly different from those of Dwarf Soissons. 
Pods longer and heavier. Seeds lighter green in color and rather 
more plump than those of the Flageolets. 

Grenell Stringless. Refs. 48, 91. This variety 
was one of the varieties originating with W. H. Grenell, 
Pierrepoint Manor, N. Y., and v/as introduced by J. 
Bolgiano in 1905. The flat pods and short picking season 
prevented its success in competition with Burpee String- 
less, Giant Stringless and Bountiful, varieties that equal 
it in quality and excel it in earliness. 

Plants very similar to those of Red Valentine, but slightly 
larger, stiff er-stemmed and with rather more spreading branches; 
quite free from disease. Pods long, but variable, 5 } ■•> to nearly 
7 inches, round, thick, nearly J i inch in diameter, much curved, 
particularly toward tip, slightly swollen over seeds, ends lon^- 
pointed, ending in long, slender, slightly curved tips, green, brittle, 
stringless, with slight fiber, of good quality. Seeds 5 to 6, about 
li inch long, rather more than half as wide, oval in cross-section, 
hardly plump, broad oblong, well rounded at ends, white, patterned 
much like Golden-eyed Wax, but eye-patch and streak over end 
yellowish brown or fawn, lighter than that of bean mentioned, and 
with less definite borders, darker greenish or brown eye-ring. 

Henderson. As might be surmised, this relatively 
new bean originated with the firm of the same name and 



was introduced by them in 1920. The parentage is not 
known but the seed and plant characters show a resem- 
blance to such varieties as Full Measure, Red Valentine, 
Longfellow, Mohawk, and Early Refugee. There is 
another peculiar similarity that may show relationship; 
the seed of Henderson is practically identical with the 
seed of Golden Age which was also introduced by 
Henderson 8s Co., but two years later or in 1922. It 
is possible that both varieties have one or both parents 
in common; one variety however, produces green pods 
and the other wax pods. 

At Geneva pods were ready for picking in 53 days 
or 6 days later than Tendergreen and about the same in 
season as Longfellow, Magpie, or Six Weeks. It is 
somewhat similar to Red Valentine in color of pod and 
length of tips but much more curved with indentations 
(inch marks J soon showing. These, however, are not 
as marked as in pods of Giant Stringless Green Pod or 
Full Measure. The foliage is a lighter green than 
Tendergreen and the leaflets are smaller and less circular 
in appearance. 

Plant medium in size, 14 inches high with spread of 12 to 
15 inches; erect, compact, vigor good, yield only fair. Stem stout, 
rigid, smooth; branches few, green thruout. Foliage medium, 
abundant, medium green, dull, crumpled, slightly rough, thick; 
leaflets about 4 3 4 inches long, 3 ] 2 inches wide at one-fourth dis- 
tance from base, with edges showing slight inward curve to rather 
sharp point. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light silvery 
green in color. Quality good; fleshy, brittle, stringless and quite 
fine, altho not ideal in texture. Size moderately long, narrow and 
plump (5-6 x Yi x ?s _1 2 inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. 
Shape round, nearly circular to oblate in cross-section, moderately 
curved, slightly constricted, not crowded, smooth but occasionally 
marked with diagonal, silvery, blister-like markings, filled to the 
tip and edge and tapering on the end. Spur long, moderately 
stout and recurved. Suture, placental is indented and carpellary, 
rounded. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.55 x .65 x .5 cm, (65-70 per oz.), 
somewhat cylindrical to long reniform, moderately plump, nearly 
circular to broad oval in cross-section; ends abruptly rounded. 
Hilum medium, fiat. Color intermediate between Full Measure 
and Longfellow, tawny yellow under color (ochraceous tawny), 
mottled and splashed over the entire surface with reddish brown 
(sanford's brown) of varying intensity. 

Hodson Green Pod. Refs. 48. Sometime previous 
to 1905 a stray plant with green pods was found in a 
field of Hodson Wax by O. W. Clark and Son who 
are also credited with introducing the variety. It has 
one of the most attractive pods of any American bean; 
very long, practically straight, of flat type but quite 
plump, of good green color. Unfortunately the quality 
of the pods is as poor as the appearance is good. 

Plants tall, ljjj feet, with stout stems, but long, spreading 
branches, runnerless but secondary branches occasionally trail on 
the soil. Foliage moderately abundant, dark dull green, rough; 
leaflets very long, 6 inches, and two-thirds as wide, on very long 
stalks. Pods 7 ] 2 inches long and as indicated above. Seeds of 
Valentine color, but showing more of light areas and red areas 
polished rather than dull, curved kidney-shape, about ■? £ inch 
long, hardly half as wide, fairly plump, about 80 to the ounce. 

Hoover Special. Woodruff- Boyce Seed Co. first 
found this growing near Seattle, Washington, and 
named it in 1919, for the former Food Administrator, 



44 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



now President. It is said to be very hardy, so that it 
can be planted early and therefore furnish pods before 
any other greenpod bean. It is suitable for a dry shell 
bean. 

Plant large, stout; leaflets coarse, dark green. Pods 6 to 
6 1 _. inches long; flat, with long, tapering tips, medium dark green, 
undoubtedly soon stringy. Seeds large, oval, slightly flattened, 
white, mottled red. 

Hundredfold. Refs. 47, 53, 93, 94, 98. Syn. 
Hundred for One. This was grown here and at the 
Missouri Botanical Garden; but is not now listed by 
seedsmen. 

Plant strictly dwarf, 1 foot or less, moderately vigorous; 
leaflets deep green 3 to 4 inches long, 2 to 3 inches wide; considerably 
wrinkled. Flowers white. Pods green, 3 to4j^ inches long, narrow, 
nearly round in cross-section, curved with rather long, stout, stringy 
and fibrous. Seeds under one-half inch, half as wide, plump, oval, 
often with truncated ends, bright yellowish brown with marked 
brown eye-ring. 

Ilsenburg. Refs. 47, 93, 94. Wing considered 
this, an old German variety, so similar to Mohawk that 
he named them as identical, altho his data show that it 
was more than a week later and gave alnost double the 
yield of Mohawk. Irish said it differed from Mohawk 
in more drab-colored seeds finely spotted with yellow. 
Vilmorin considered it a good " half -late " variety. 

Jones Green Pod. Refs. 42. By crossing Garden 
Pride with Burpee Stringless, A. N. Jones secured a new 
strain which became the successor to Garden Pride. 
Maule introduced Jones Green Pod in 1906 as an all- 
purpose bean. It apparently never found favor and 
soon disappeared from trade lists. 

Much earlier than Garden Pride, a stronger grower, more 
resistant to rust, with longer, straighter and fleshier pods and 
larger seeds. 

King of the Greens. Refs. 16, 28, 53, 61, 80, 81. 
This is another of the varieties originated with Bonne- 
main and was introduced in the same year ( 1888 1 as 
Green Bagnolet. It was said to have been a selection 
from Wonder of France. The name is often used as a 
synonym for other varieties of similar type. Like other 
Bonnemain varieties, the leaves fall early thereby 
facilitating the harvesting operation. 

According to Denaiffe it differs from its sister variety only 
in rather shorter, more branched, more compact plants, and in 
more regular, handsome pods. 

Knickerbocker. Refs. 48, 91. Henderson intro- 
duced Knickerbocker in 1902 with the notation that it 
originated in Genesee Co., New York as a Red Valentine 
x Yosemite Mammoth Wax cross. Altho it is apparently 
better than Burpee Stringless, to which it was very 
similar, it was not able to displace that variety and 
soon disappeared, being carried only five years in the 
introducer's catalogs. According to Jarvis it " ranks 
about the same as Burpee Stringless in productiveness, 
quality and attractiveness." 

Plants like those of Yosemite Mammoth. Pods like those of 
Burpee Stringless but decidedly larger, thicker, more constricted 
between beans, straighter, much curved near tip, never curved 
backward at stem end. Seeds oblong, more frequently truncate at 
ends than those of Burpee Stringless, sub-circular in cross-section, 
deep red or maroon in color. 



Langport Wonder. Kelway introduced this 
variety in 1919 or before and it reached America in 
1921. 

Plants are of the Sutton Superlative type, more productive 
than Canadian Wonder, very early with pale green pods in clusters, 
7 inches long, slender, straight, with comparatively short tips and 
necks, stringless. Seeds rather larger and more uniformly kidney- 
shaped than those of Canadian Wonder, horse chestnut color rather 
sparingly blotched by the cream under color. 

Long Yellow Six Weeks. Refs. 10, 13, 15, 16, 

27, 28, 29, 41, 45, 47, 48, 49, 53, 56, 66, 67, 80, 81, 91, 
93, 94, 97, 98. Syns. Breck's Yellow Cranberry, Date 
Wax, Early Six Weeks, Gold Bean, Pride of Newton, 
Rob Roy. This is undoubtedly one of the very oldest 
bean varieties known. It is found in practically every 
country where beans are grown. Where it started in 
cultivation must remain unknown; in the United States 
the earliest mention is found in the earlier catalogs of 
American Seedsmen or around about 1825. Until its 
daughter variety Bountiful (1897) came along it was the 
favorite flat green-podded market bean. Round Yellow 
Six Weeks (different) and Long Yellow Six Weeks were 
carried together and as far as records go are of equal 
antiquity. They were probably grown by native tribes- 
men, picked up and distributed by the early explorers. 
Long Yellow Six Weeks has been known as the Gold 
Bean; according to Martens it is known in Canada as 
Montreal Bean, in Italy as Fagiola della regina, in 
France as Haricots rond printaires or Flageolet jaune, 
in Germany as Early Yellow Princess Dwarf, Yellow 
Egg, etc. Martens classed this variety under Phaseolus 
ellipticus aurens. 

The pods are smaller than those of Bountiful, 
somewhat darker with less silvering, much tougher, and 
curved more in the middle rather than towards tip. 
The plants are smaller, more erect, with foliage darker 
green, altho lighter than other greenpods, with much less 
of the characteristic bronzing appearing on the elder 
plants of Bountiful. It is quite different from other 
varieties grown during the same period Long Yellow 
Six Weeks was popular. 

Plant medium in size. 12 inches high with equal spread, erect 
but rather open; vigor good, moderately productive; branches 
green thruout. Foliage abundant, light green; leaflets slightly rough, 
crumpled, large in size. Flowers blush pink or lilac. Pods borne 
below the foliage; medium light green in color. Quality poor to 
fair; stringy, fibrous, fairly brittle when very young and coarse in 
texture. Size long, quite broad and moderately flat, 6-6' _> x ' _> x 

'' s inches', containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long ovate in 
cross-section, slightly curved, straight backed regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge and moderately rounded at the 
end. Spur long, slender, and moderately curved. Suture, placental 
is flattened to somewhat rounded and carpellary, moderately 
obtuse. Seeds medium to large, 1.55 x .7 x .55 cm, (65-70 per oz. I; 
moderately long reniform, somewhat flattened, oval in cross-section; 
ends uniformly rounded. Hilum medium to large, protuberant. 
Color buffy brown i pinkish cinnamon to cinnamon buffi, over the 
entire surface, marked with a wide, slightly irregular, dark brown, 

mars brown) eye-ring. 

Longfellow. Refs. 36, 41, 47, 48, 49, 64, 91. 99. 

Syns. Emerald Beauty, Emperor of Russia, French Lead 
Pencil, French Market, French Stringless, Perfectly 
Straight Round Pod, Sutton's Perfection. 





EMERALD BEAUTY 



(Natural sizei 







MAGPIE 





LOW'S CHAMPION 




WONDER OF FRANCE 



DWARF GREEN PODS 



Natural sizei 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



45 



The origin and early history of this bean with its 
many names and synonyms, is quite obscure; but 
Denaiffe could detect no difference between Empereur de 
Russie, which is undoubtedly Longfellow and a variety 
long grown in Southern France known as Nain gris 
maraicher (Dwarf Gray Market Garden). Longfellow 
was brought to America in 1895 by Henderson and 
offered as a novelty in his catalog of that year. The 
appearance of the pods which are very straight, round, 
long tipped, and dark green, is better than the quality 
which is only good when the pods are quite small. The 
plants are lacking in vigor, hardiness, resistance to 
disease and productiveness. It is grown to some extent 
in the South where a small round pod is desired as a 
market bean. In season it is classed as midseason to 
late, 53 days, at Geneva about 6 days later than Black 
Valentine and Giant Stringless Greenpod or about the 
same in season as Triumph of the Frames. The seed 
differs from other varieties in the light lavender mark- 
ings. In general appearance the plants are more like 
Black Valentine than any other, the pods are also 
similar in color to pods of that variety, but are shorter, 
rounder, and straighter with a longer, more ill defined 
point, less productive in yield and later in season. The 
foliage is quite similar to Black Valentine but the plants 
are more scraggly probably due to the longer branches. 

Plant medium to large, 14 to 18 inches tall, spread of 12 to 
15 inches; erect with rather scraggly open growth, runnerless; 
vigor, fair, only moderately productive during rather short season. 
Stem stout, round, ridged, internodes long with rather prominent 
nodes; branches, long outstretched, spreading, weighed down by 
filling pods, this accounts for scraggly appearance of plant, green 
thruout. Foliage medium abundant, rather dark full green, rough, 
slightly crumpled, medium veined, slight pubescence, thin to 
medium thick; leaflets 4J^ by 3Ji inches wide at }z distance from 
base, broad for length, sides curved to sharply tapering points. 
Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; medium dark 
dull green in color. Quality good; slightly stringy, tender, quite 
fleshy, and rather fine in texture. Size long, rather narrow and 
quite slender (6-6j^ x }i x tz inches) containing 5-6 seeds per 
pod. Shape round to oval, nearly circular to ovate in cross-section 
straight to slightly curved, straight backed to somewhat hump 
backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge 
and rounded on the end. Spur long, slender and recurved. Suture, 
placental flat to somewhat rounded, and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.6 x .55 x .55 cm, (70-95 per oz.) nearly cylin- 
drical, sub-reniform, very plump, nearly circular in cross-section; 
ends abruptly rounded. Hilum small, flat. Color dingy brownish 
red 'Corinthian red; of various shades, mottled and splashed with 
pale to deep buff (vinaceous cinnamon) over entire surface. A 
rather wide range of color shades is apparent with this variety. 

Low's Champion. Refs. 11, 15, 16, 41, 48, 61, 

63, 66, 70, 80, 91, 99. Syns. Buck's Improved, Dwarf 
Red Cranberry, Early Champion, New Champion, Red 
Cranberry Dwarf. 

The bright red color and the shape of the seed of 
this variety very much resemble a cranberry so it is 
possible that Low's Champion as introduced by Aaron 
Low Seed Company in 1884 was only a renaming of the 
sort previously known as Dwarf Cranberry. It is 
certainly one of the oldest varieties in cultivation for 
it is found frequently in old lists of varieties that were 
included in the early trials. Rawson in 1885 listed 



Champion among the novelties as did Gregory in 1885- 
Where the original type came from is unknown but it 
must have been among those plants cultivated by the 
Indians. 

It is an excellent shell bean and is also of value as 
a string bean, since it has a very brittle meaty pod of 
inappreciable string and slight fiber. Its flavor is 
unsurpassed, cooked and cut it has a real " beany " 
taste. It remains long in the snap stage making it an 
attractive variety for the home garden. Some eastern 
canners, chiefly in Maine, are using Low's Champion to 
pack a cut green bean for a special trade. At Geneva 
it was a late to intermediate variety, 56 days to the first 
pods, therefore similar in season to Dwarf Horticultural, 
Longfellow, and Satisfaction, or 6 to 8 days later than 
Bountiful and about 5 days earlier than Refugee. Except 
in color of seed it is very similar to Warren. The plants 
make a larger growth and are darker in foliage than 
Ruby Horticultural. The pods are also larger, natter, 
straighter, and lighter colored, being described as 
" whity-green " in one description. The pods differ 
from other shell beans represented as " Horts " in that 
the pods of Low's Champion are not splashed with 
crimson. 

Plant medium to large, 12 to 15 inches tall with spread of 
about 15 inches; moderately erect, pods often touching the ground, 
very compact and bushy; without runners, hardy, vigorous, and 
moderately productive, long in season. Stem stout, round, ridged 
below; branches rather few, green thruout. Foliage abundant, very 
dark green, rather rough, slightly crumpled or wrinkled; leaflets 
large, long, of medium width, 5 inches long by 3 ,'2 inches wide, 
quite sharply pointed. Flowers lilac. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage; very light green in 
color. Quality good, fleshy, very tender, inappreciable string, with 
very slight fiber, pod walls very thick. Size medium short, broad 
and moderately slender (4 ] 2-6 x s l x ?g) containing 4-5 seeds per 
pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross-section, straight, hump backed, 
regular, crowded, filled to the tip and edge, and rounded at the end. 
Spur long, moderately thick and somewhat curved. Suture, 
placental is rounded and carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.3 x .95 x .8 cm, (45-55 per oz.); 
extremely short, broad oval, plump; ends rounded but occasionally 
truncate. Hilum small, slightly indented. Color very dark reddish 
maroon (ox-blood red) over the entire surface, increasing in intensity 
on the hilar surface. 

Lyonnaise. As the name indicates, Lyonnaise 
originated in the vicinity of Lyons, France, and was 
introduced about 1887, reaching the United States in 
1901. Tho apparently a worthy variety, it never became 
popular with us as in France and elsewhere. It was not 
only regarded as a good market variety, but was con- 
sidered one of the best second early stringless beans for 
the home garden. 

Plant dwarf, 1 to lj£ feet tall. Foliage light green (Denaiffe 
says very dark), of medium size, somewhat blistered. Flowers 
lilac. Pods very long, slender but fleshy, round, sharply pointed 
and with very long, slender tips, green. Seeds 6, large 5 8 t0 5 4 inch 
long, not half as wide, long oblong with truncated ends, rather flat, 
frequently curved sidewise or irregular, yellowish to reddish brown 
(coppery maroon, Denaiffe) with rather inconspicuous darker 
eye-ring. 

Marvel of Paris. Refs. 47, 49, 59. A variety 
first sponsored commercially in 1892 by Vilmorin, but 
originated some years earlier with market gardeners near 



46 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Paris, probably coming as a selection from Black Speckled 
or from Solitaire. It was brought to America in 1894 
by Thorburn, and carried by him for 30 years. It 
never won popularity here, as it did in England and 
France where it is still much grown for the market. 

Plant much like Mohawk; more dwarf; a day or so earlier. 
Pods much more slender, splashed with violet red where those of 
Mohawk are reddish brown. Seeds decidedly smaller and more 
slender, more often kidney-shaped, color and markings almost 
identical. 

Masterpiece. Refs. 53. Syns. Glory of St. Andrew. 
Before the advent of the refrigerator car and therefore 
previous to the development of large areas in the South 
for the growing of green produce to ship to northern 
markets there was a place for bean varieties suitable 
for forcing in greenhouses. This variety is another of 
the group that was used chiefly for this purpose. It was 
originally introduced by Vilmorin as jaune de Perreux 
about 1907. Sutton listed it in 1910 as a novelty, under 
the name Sutton's Masterpiece. Bunting of London, 
using one of the French synonyms of the variety, trans- 
lated, introduced this bean as Glory of St. Andrew. 
After several trials he found it to be identical with 
Masterpiece. Webber and Don brought Masterpiece, 
to America in 1915, and Michell listed Glory of St, 
Andrew in 1918. 

The first pods were ready in about 52 days, or 5-6 
days later than pods of Bountiful. The pods are longer, 
more slender but have the same silvery green color as 
Bountiful. 

Plants are very similar to those of Bountiful with foliage 
perhaps slightly darker. Flower lilac. Pods are borne intermediate 
among the foliage; light silvery green in color. Quality good, fleshy, 
almost wholly stringless, quite fiberless and fine in texture, not as 
favorable in these respects as Bountiful. Size long, rather narrow 
and slender, (6-7 x n s ,'4 inches) containing 5-6 seeds per pod. 
Shape flat, ovate in cross-section, straight, straight backed, mod- 
erately constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge 
and pointed on the end. Spur long, straight and slender. Suture, 
placental is flattened and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds large, 1.8 x .8 x .6 cm, (60-65 per oz.); long reniform, 
fairly plump to somewhat flattened; ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum large, flattened. Color very similar to Bountiful, light buff 
(cream buff) which later turns to dark tawny yellow (clay color) 
over entire surface; marked with a distinct broad eye-ring in two 
bands of different shades, light browTi nearest the hilum and deep 
olive brown on the outer portion. 

Matchless. Refs. 47, 51. This is a French variety 
which originated with Vilmorin before 1894; and which 
was praised most highly by him and others in France 
for its very early and great production of young pods 
which chefs and consumers in that country consider 
most necessary. Because the pods become stringy and 
tough later in the season, this variety never won favor 
in America, although the green shell beans are excellent. 

Plant 1 to l}^ feet tall. Foliage yellowish green, scarcely 
wrinkled; leaflets large. Flowers white. Pods 4-6 inches long, 
nearly ,' _< inch broad, almost circular in cross-section, smooth 
very regular, nearly or quite straight, with slender, straight, half- 
inch spur. Seeds 6 or 7, white, with small black spot at each end 
of eye, which rarely become " butterfly " marking, nearly ) £ inch 
long, more than half as wide and nearly half as thick, oblong or 
almost kidney shaped. 

Mohawk. Refs. 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 26, 27, 45, 48, | 



49, 56, 59, 66, 80, 91, 96, 97, 98. Mohawk held an 
important place in the United States and in England 
for more than three-quarters of a century and is still 
listed by a few American seedsmen. It was cataloged 
by Thorburn as early as 1825 but indications are that 
it had been cultivated much earlier. The name Mohawk 
would link its early use to the river valley of that name 
in New York State. The long straight handsome pods 
mask the poor quality which they possess. Mohawk 
is a variety of historical importance although it may 
also be suitable to use as an early parent in future 
breeding work. 

Plant very tall, erect, vigorous, and hardy, the heavy foliage 
withstanding light frosts. Foliage very dark green, rough but 
glossy, thick; leaflets of medium size, somewhat larger than those 
of Refugee, and broader at base. Flowers blush pink. Pods 
5 ] 2 to 6'_> inches long, nearly -'4 inch wide, long-ovate, thinning 
rapidly toward ventral edge, later becoming broad ovate or almost 
long oval, straight or occasionally slightly curved toward tip, latter 
short, rather heavy, rigid, almost straight from about middle of 
short-pointed end of pod, long-necked, dark green, sometimes with 
faint brownish or purplish lines, thin-fleshed, coarse-textured, soon 
tough, very stringy, fibrous, of poor quality. 

Seeds 5, about 55 to 65 to the ounce, occasionally 6, about 
% inch, nearly half as wide, one-third as thick, rather narrow oval 
in cross-section, oblong, very slightly ovate, with eye-side only 
slightly straighter than dorsum, ends well-rounded, very seldom 
truncate; light faintly purplish cream or purplish light brown 
almost wholly covered with patches of deep purplish brown, both 
colors darkening with age to produce a dark brown or blackish 
bean with lighter brown areas. 

Negro Long-pods. Refs. 47, 51, 93, 94. This 
old variety is said to be of German origin; we are not 
able to identify it in Martens Die Garten Bohnen 
(I860) but our earliest reference to it is German. It 
has disappeared from American catalogs; but as it is 
still grown in several European countries, seed of it was 
secured for trial here. It gave us the longest pods 
of any kidney bean with the exception of The Prince, 
which exceeded it by about half an inch, mostly due 
to longer tip. 

Plant not over 1 foot tall, tho usually described as one-fourth 
to one-third taller, very late. Stem stout, many spreading branches 
and many short runners; leaflets small, narrow, taper-pointed, 
almost smooth, light green. Fiowers pink. Pods single, on long, 
rather heavy stalks, 8 inches or more long, about ■' ,, inch broad, 
very slender, ovate in cross-section, slightly curved, very long 
S-shaped, with long-pointed end and ' ■> to 3 4 inch, fairly heavy, 
rigid curved tip. Seeds } ■> inch or more long, about 95 to the 
ounce, oblong, or curved kidney shape, quite plump, shining black. 

New Slringless Green Pod. A new variety intro- 
duced in 1930 by the Associated Seed Growers. It is 
the result of careful breeding using known varieties as 
parents and careful selection to perfect the better 
hybrid. The parents used in the cross were Full Measure 
and Keeney's Stringless Green Refugee. Only after 
twelve years work was the stock considered fixed to 
warrant its introduction. This variety has pods of 
fine quality and should be worthy of trial for both 
truckers and canners. It is hardier than Full Measure 
and its season is very concentrated, producing the pods 
abundantly and nearly all at one time. 

Pods light to medium green. Quality excellent, very meaty, 
stringless and without fiber, texture fine. Size long, medium 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



47 



broad, plump 6 6] . ■ x " . x \ inches'! containing 5-6 seeds. Shape 
round, circular in cross-section, slightly curved, straight-backed, 
regular, filled to tip and edge, end pointed. Spur medium long, 
thick and recurved. Suture, placental is slightly indented and 
carpellary. rounded to broadly accuminate. Seeds resemble those 
of both parents, when freshly harvested color is more like Refugee 
but with age the purple darkens and the brown of Full Measure is 
present. 

Newington Wonder. Refs. 13, 51. Syns. Brown 
Date Bean. This English variety originating about 
1850. was noted in the U. S. Commercial Agr. Rept. 
p. 536 of 1855 and was said by Robert Thompson to be 
" the best variety of kidney beans." It reached America 
very soon after and for fifty years or more was grown 
to a limited extent. The pods of this old variety were 
of poor quality, tough and stringy when full grown. 
The seed greatly resembles that of Giant Stringless Green 
Pod and therefore it appears that Newington Wonder 
has been known as a synonym for that variety. The 
old variety is still used in England since it appears in 
trials as of 1909 and later. 

Plant very dwarf, spreading with some runners and abundant 
dark green, fine, smooth, foliage. Pods green soon changing to 
pale yellow often almost entirely covered with reddish purple, short, 
broad, straight, crisp and tender when young; and, if kept picked 
continue to form over a long season, making the variety very 
productive. Seeds small, oblong or slightly kidney-shaped, decided 
truncate, light brown, dun-colored, or pale brownish drab with 
faint yellowish eye-ring. 

Osborn. Refs. 47, 51, 53, 85, 94, 98. A first class 
certificate was conferred upon this variety in 1873 by 
the Royal Horticultural Society. This was also the 
year of its introduction. Irish considered it identical 
with Emile for they were undoubtedly of the same 
horticultural use and value. At Geneva pods of Osborn 
were longer and straighter, splashed with purple, and 
more stringy; while the seeds were narrower in propor- 
tion to their length, often slightly kidney shaped and 
differed in color from those of Emile in being brown or 
blue black rather than brownish purple. In tests here 
in 1883 Osborn was three days later than Emile and 
slightly more productive. 

Perpetual. Refs. 51, 53. This bean was intro- 
duced by Carter before 1913 and was listed in his 
American catalogs. It was grown in the trials at Geneva 
and noted as exceedingly similar in plant and pod to 
Cream Valentine. 

Pods slender, longer and only two-thirds as wide as Cream 
Valentine. Quality stringy but without parchment, fine texture. 
Seeds 6, slightly more pink than those of Cream Valentine, and 
often truncate at the ends from compression in the pods, the contact 
between the beans resulting in small flattened areas of dark brown 
which contrasted noticeably with the body color and were usually 
darker than the eye-ring. 

Pheasant-eye. In 1910 this variety was listed as 
new by Rahe Seed Co. and was said to have come from 
a single plant found in a row of Bountiful and to have 
all the good points of that variety with added symmetry 
of pod. 

Plants rather inferior to those of Bountiful. Pods of rather 
better color, ready later, therefore flatter when pods of the same 
size were compared; stringless, but rather thin-fleshed. Seeds of 
same size and shape as those of Bountiful, dull veiny white, blotched 



about eye and toward one end with yellowish brown, changing 
to light brown or reddish brown with band of same color over other 
end and spots irregularly distributed near margins of patches. 

Prince. Refs. 53. This is the result of a cross 
between Superlative and Perfection introduced by 
Sutton in 1927 and in the United States in 1929 by 
Walter. Because of the very long, straight, dark green 
pods this variety has possibilities as a forcing and home 
garden bean. A late variety ready for picking in 54 
days at Geneva. Prince in our trials proved to be one 
of the longest podded varieties grown; plant is vigorous 
but smaller than Superlative, the pods are longer and 
rather shorter tipped and the seeds somewhat similar 
to the Henderson but with more red. 

Plants somewhat smaller than those of Superlative, vigorous, 
healthy, with dark green foliage. Flowers blush pink. Pods borne 
intermediate among the foliage; light, medium, waxy green in color. 
Quality fair to good; brittle, nearly stringless, fiberless but rather 
coarse in texture. Size long, medium broad and fairly slender 
(7—8 x re x j^ inches), containing 6-7 seeds per pod. Shape flat, 
ovate in cross-section, slightly curved to much curved, straight 
backed, regular, not crowded, filled to the tip and edge but not 
towards the stem tip and pointed at the end. Spur long, slender 
and recurved. Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 
Seeds large, 1.8 x .7 x .55 cm (50 per oz.i; decidedly long reniform, 
somewhat flattened; ends uniformly rounded. Hilum large, flat 
but somewhat curved. Color dark buff ' cinnamon rufous orange) 
under color, almost entirely covered with dark reddish-brown 
claret brown) mottling. 

Prolific Piekler. Refs. 41, 48. This bean was 
grown by some German gardeners near Rochester, N. Y., 
for some time before it was listed by Vick in 1894. It 
was exceedingly like Canadian Wonder, but with much 
longer pods; but very productive. 

Pods more than 8 inches long, flat, much constricted between 
seeds, stringy, tough and of poor quality, but useful in early stages 
for pickling. Seeds 7 or 8, more than % inch long, half as wide, 
flat, much like a long Lima bean in shape, plum violet in color. 

Purple Pod. Refs. 28, 49, 93, 94. Syns. Blue 
Pod Butter. Since there is no known reference to the 
appearance or use of this bean among the early settlers 
it probably is of European origin. There is a climbing 
Purple Pod which is a very old French variety and which 
in all characters except climbing habit resembles the 
variety introduced to this country in 1888 by W. Atlee 
Burpee. This Purple Pod Dwarf or Bush supposedly 
came from Germany. This bean is little known or 
planted except by home gardeners, or by some who 
favor it as a pickling bean. A second early, ready in 
50 days at Geneva. In color of foliage this variety is 
unlike all others. The pod is shorter, broader, flatter 
than pods of Bountiful, perhaps more like pods of 
Imperial Wax in general shape. 

Plant medium, about 15 inches tall with equal spread, a true 
bush, erect but with growth rather scraggly, no runners but some 
long branches that sag down with weight of pods; rather vigorous 
in growth but not overly productive and of short bearing season. 
Stem stout, thick with short internodes, more or less purple tinged, 
especially at nodes; branches few, squared, ridged, purple coloring 
at nodes and flower stalks. Foliage abundant, quite dense, dark 
green with purplish cast, dull, crumpled but smooth, medium 
veined, medium thick, pubescence heavy, leaflets 4 inches long 
with width of 3 3 4 , the greatest width is at base, base line very nearly 
straight, terminal leaflet triangular with sides straight, tapering 
uniformly to point. Base leaflets shorter, 2 } _> inches long by 2 inches 



48 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



wide, quite unequal sided. Side of mid-vein nearest terminal 
leaflet nearly twice as wide as far side, base is angled, mid-vein 
angled toward terminal leaflet, giving leaf quite an odd shape, 
sometimes described as rolled backwards; tips short, wide. Flowers 
phlox purple, the upper part or back of the " Standard " very dark 
purple black. 

Pods borne both intermediate and below the foliage: dark dull 
greenish purple in color. Quality good, brittle, fleshy, occasionally 
somewhat stringy, and fine in texture. Size long, broad, and 
rather slender 6-6 '_■ x s t x '4- A inches), containing 5-6 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, elliptical in cross-section, straight, straight 
backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and 
rounded on the end. Spur long, slender and straight. Suture, 
placental flat to slightly indented and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.4 x .7 x .45 cm, (105 per oz.), oval to occasion- 
ally sub-reniform, oval in cross-section, somewhat flattened to 
fairly plump; one end rounded and the other somewhat truncate. 
Hilum medium, flattened. Color light buff 'pale pinkish buff) 
over entire surface marked with a rather prominent, darker shaded, 
vein-like under pattern and a narrow two-toned tawny yellow 
(tawny) eye-ring. 

Rachel. Refs. 47, 56, 97, 98. This old bean is 
supposedly of American origin. It was included in 
the trials at Geneva in 1882 but has not been listed in 
American catalogs during the present century, nor was 
it described by Tracy or Jarvis, tho included by Irish. 

Plant 1 to 1' 4 feet tall, vigorous, making compact bush; 
foliage abundant, light or yellowish green; leaflets 3 to 3'_> inches 
long, 2 ' _> to 3 wide, not wrinkled. Flowers white or faintly blushed. 
Pods 4'_> to 5 ] 4 inches long, nearly '_> inch wide, oval in cross- 
section, somewhat swollen by beans, straight or nearly so, quite 
blunt at ends, with short, slender curved tips from dorsal edges, 
green, occasionally lightly streaked violet. Seeds oblong or kidney- 
shaped, slightly more than } > inch long, more than half as wide 
and nearly as thick as wide, dark chocolate brown nearly covering 
bean, with small, irregular whitish area on end toward point of 
pod, usually less than one-eighth surface. 

Reliance. Refs. 48, 51, 53. Sutton introduced 
Reliance in 1903; it was given an Award of Merit the 
same year by the Royal Horticultural Society, and 
considered by them to be an improvement over Ne Plus 
Ultra. 

Plant very vigorous, hardy, quite disease-resistant, early. 
and moderately productive. Pods large, 5}o to 6 inches long, 
slender, ovate in cross-section, straight, with pointed ends and 
prominent tip, attractive, light green, stringy, tough but fine- 
grained and of fair quality. Seeds 6-7, oblong ? s i nc h long, half 
as wide, often truncate, nearly circular in cross-section, olive yellow, 
with darker eye-ring. 

Red Flageolet. Refs. 47, 53, 97, 98. This old 
French variety is almost indistinguishable from Canadian 
Wonder but its seeds are slightly lighter in color, smaller 
and relatively greater in length. The varieties, however, 
are undoubtedly of distinct origin. Red Flageolet in 
France, where it is most grown, is prized mostly for 
green shell beans; but it is equally useful with Canadian 
Wonder as an early snap bean. The seeds vary con- 
siderably in color, which, as well as the popular mis- 
conceptions of the colors, crimson, scarlet, and red, 
accounts for the many synonyms of the variety. 

Red Valentine. Refs. 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19, 

20, 25, 26, 28, 29, 38, 41, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 55, 57. 
58, 61, 63, 66, 67, 68, 80, 81, 84. 87, 91. Syns. Early 
Speckled Red Valentine, Early Wonder Red Valentine, 
Lightning Early Red Valentine, and over 50 other , 



names differing in the arrangement of the adjectives 
early, extra early, improved, red, red speckled and round 
podded. 

Valentine is an American variety known at least 
since 1832, for it was then cataloged by Landreth's as 
Extra Early Red Valentine. It was reported as originat- 
ing near Philadelphia; but Burr, in 1863, says it had 
" long been grown in England and other parts of Europe 
and was common to gardens in almost every section of 
the United States. Denaiffe reports it as an " old 
American variety introduced into France in 1889." 
It was probably flat podded and stringy in its early 
days, but by Burr's time its pods were " almost cyl- 
indrical," tender and very fleshy, remaining long on the 
plants without becoming hard and tough. To main- 
tain and, possibly, to improve the variety has been the 
constant aim of breeders; and their steps toward these 
ends, often merely sidewise rather than forward, have 
resulted in the multiplicity of synonyms shown in our 
references, and nearly as many more combinations have 
been omitted. So varied are the listings that it is 
exceedingly difficult to say how many seedsmen offer 
the variety, but it is undoubtedly as in Burr's day and 
in Tracy's one of the most popular garden beans, tho 
far less grown for market than Black Valentine. Varie- 
ties with larger pods and better quality have gradually 
replaced Red Valentine notable Burpee's Stringless 
Green Pod, Full Measure, Giant Stringless Green Pod, 
and Bountiful. 

There have been and are many strains of Red 
Valentine that are favored in certain sections, Improved 
Early Red Valentine i Hopkins I has long been popular. 
Landreth introduced in 1930 a new stringless strain as 
Landreth's Extra Early Stringless Red Valentine, a full 
description of which occurs in the 1931 catalog. Red 
Valentine has long been a favorite for growing in the 
Southern States owing to its hardiness and good keeping 
quality which factor makes it a suitable bean for shipping 
long distances. It is a very reliable sort, making a crop 
under quite adverse conditions on all soil types. The 
pods are produced in clusters and held up well off the 
ground. It was formerly used to some extent in canning, 
but since the pods pass thru the canning stage rather 
quickly, with the seeds taking size rapidly, it has been 
replaced by the newer varieties. The pods are rather 
too short and too much curved for best market garden 
use. 

At Geneva it was a second early, the pods were 
pickable in from 49 to 52 days. This makes Red 
Valentine about 3 days later than Stringless Greenpod or 
Bountiful and the same in season as Full Measure and 
Early Refugee. It was less productive with us than 
Refugee or Full Measure; the same in season and useful- 
ness as Early Refugee, but the pods were more meaty 
and of better quality; the vines more erect and more 
open in habit. The plant is smaller than Black Valen- 
tine, pods are shorter, more curved, but much thicker, 
more tender, and with less string and parchment. Pods 
are not so thick as those of Full Measure, but are shorter 
and more curved. The wide marks or indentations 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



49 



between Deans common to pods of Stringless Greenpods 
and Full Measure are not found in Red Valentine. 

Brown Speckled Valentine, Cream Valentine, Giant 
Valentine, and White Valentine, are all different types. 

Plant small to medium, commonly under 1 foot tall, but under 
good growing conditions 12 to 14 inches high with spread of ' 4 to 
1 foot: very erect, tree like, compact, yet not dense, runnerless; 
vigor fair, very hardy, moderately productive over moderate season, 
few pods occasionally appearing above foliage. Stem in some 
strains somewhat slender, generally, however, stout and rigid, round 
below first node, above somewhat ridged, short jointed; branches 
few without secondaries, green thruout. Foliage moderately 
abundant, not dense, medium green to light green in color, surface 
dull rather than glossy, rough, slightly crumpled, medium veined, 
medium in thickness; leaflets somewhat like those of Refugee, but 
larger, about 4 inches long by 2 3 4 inches wide, appearing narrow 
because widest near base and tapering rapidly to rather sharp 
points. Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage: medium dark 
dull green in color. Quality very good; fleshy, tender, some%vhat 
stringy, practically fiberless and medium fine in texture. Size 
medium long, moderately narrow and slender, more slender than 
Stringless Green Pod, (4J j-5 x 3 g x 3 . inches ', containing 4-5 seeds 
per pod. Shape round, nearly circular in outline, curved, often 
creasebacked, quite regular, somewhat crowded, smooth filled to 
the tip and edge and rounded at the end. Spur long, slender and 
straight, occasionally slightly recurved. Suture, placental slightly 
indented and carpellary, rounded. 

Seeds medium, 1.4 x .7 x .65 cm, 170-90 per oz.) long oval, 
plump, some strains more cylindrical than others; ends rounded and 
occasionally one slightly larger than the other. Hilum small, 
rounded. Color light fawn (vinaceous cinnamon! blotched over 
95 per cent of the surface with varying shades of dull red Vandyke 
to acajou red). 

Refugee. Refs. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 19, 29, 38, 

41, 47, 48, 49, 61, 63, 77, 91, 93, 96, 97, 98, 99. Syns. 
Brown Speckled Valentine, Improved Refugee, Late 
Refugee, Late Prolific Refugee, Round Pod Refugee. 
This very old bean has been grown in the United 
States at least since 1822 for it was listed that 
year by J. M. Thorbum & Co. Taking all of 
the many named forms of the Refugee it is not out of 
order to say that it is one of the most widely grown 
of the green-podded beans. Its origin is not definitely 
known and as it is grown wherever beans are used as 
food its beginning must remain obscure. Martens 
suggested that it probably was brought to England or to 
America by the French Huguenots or '' Refugees," for 
whom it may well have derived its name. It is exceed- 
ingly similar to Suisse gris which is one of the oldest 
French types. Martens described it as Turkish Date 
Bean and according to the same authority it is called by 
the Missouri Indians Ohmenik Pusaehna; on the Bourbon 
Island, Haricot lilas vert; in Algiers Haricot noir 
and Haricot de Bagnols; in Lisbon Haricot bleu; in 
Venice Fasioni favaoni; in Lousanne and Paris Haricot 
Suisse gris, and Haricot gris de Bagnols; in Germany 
Variegated Dutch. 

In order to counteract the tendency of Refugee 
toward flat-podded types, various seedsmen during the 
latter part of the past century and the early part of the 
present, made selections for round stringless pods. In 
one of these, at least, distinctly larger pods have been 
secured, reaching nearly 6 inches in length and nearly 



half an inch in diameter, but late in season, less produc- 
tive and soon showing strings; another strain produces 
pods one-fourth less in diameter, and almost wholly 
stringless; yet another is identical with the Excelsior 
strain of Extra Early Refugee, but nearly two weeks 
later. N. B. Keeney is credited with selecting and 
introducing the stringless type of Refugee from which 
has been derived all of our later Stringless types. 

Refugee has always been the leading green-pod 
planted to produce late snap pods. It has also been 
largely used by southern planters for shipment to 
northern markets. The small size of the pods and 
color of seed prohibit its use as a shell bean. After the 
introduction of the stringless podded type Refugee soon 
became the leading bean used for canning. The straight, 
uniform, absolutely fiberless pods have an excellent color 
and the smaller sizes are suitable for whole bean packs. 
The pods pass through canning stage slowly and promi- 
nent seed development is retarded. A late variety, 
58 to 62 days at Geneva, this is 10 days later than Early 
Refugee, Refugee Wax, Round Pod Kidney Wax, or 
Bountiful, 12 days later than Full Measure and 15 days 
later than Burpee's Stringless Green Pod. 

Plant large, 14 to 18 inches high, with spread of 15 to 18 inches; 
strictly dwarf, erect, very spreading in rows, but not scraggly, 
compact; some indeterminate shoots appear and some branches are 
tendril -like, but the plant can be said to be without runners; very 
good vigor, heavily productive over a long season, if early growth 
conditions are unfavorable the plants often will produce a good 
crop later. Stems stout, round, smooth, ridged above, internodes 
short; branches many, secondary branches numerous, continuing 
growth very late, green thruout. Foliage very abundant, dense, 
medium to dark green, bright or glossy; surface smooth, thin, very 
slight pubescence or veining; leaflets readily distinguishable from 
those of other varieties, small, 4 1 i inches long by 2 \ i inches wide, 
long, slender, elongated inclined to diamond shape, and taper- 
pointed. Flowers phlox purple. 

Pods borne below foliage, light, pale green in color. Quality 
good; brittle, without strings, very small amount of fiber and fine 
texture. Size medium long, broad and quite plump, (5— ojix^j 
x yg inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly 
circular in cross-section, straight-backed, straight but occasionally 
slightly curved, regular, filled to the tip and edge, smooth, not 
crowded and is rounded or tapering at the end. Spur long, slender 
and slightly recurved. Suture, placental is slightly indented and 
carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds medium 1.4 x .6 x .6 cm (97 per oz.), quite straight, 
cylindrical in middle tapering somewhat to ends, plump; ends 
uniformly rounded. Hilum small, flat. Color very light brown or 
dun light vinaceous-cinnamon ) , splashed and mottled over entire 
surface with dark maroon purple (blackish red-purple). 

Rhode Island White. Refs. 15, 49. A variety 
introduced by Gregory sometime between 1885 and 
1888, and which had been grown in the region about 
Portsmouth, R. I. for some years. It was said to be 
the earliest snap bean known, of first class quality and 
very productive. 

Rob Roy. Refs. 13, 47. Rob Roy is a very old 
variety and is so similar to Long Yellow Six Weeks that 
it is often considered identical with it; but the two 
appeared to have had constant, although slight, dif- 
ferences. The use of both varieties and the general 
growth habits are the same. 



50 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant of Six Weeks runnerless, those of Rob Roy with nu- 
merous short, barren runners; pods of Rob Roy shorter, yellowish 
becoming white with age: seeds of Six Weeks more or less fawn or 
tan when fresh, those of Rob Roy clear cream or yellowish, and 
broad oval, rather than kidney-shaped. 

Round Yellow Six Weeks. Refs. 6, 9, 12, 13, 16, 

25, 27, 29, 41, 47, 48, 49, 61, 66, 84, 91, 93, 94, 98. Burr 
described this variety in 1865 stating that it had been 
grown in this country for more than a century. It is, 
therefore, a companion variety in point of age with 
Long Yellow Six Weeks. Its seeds resemble the seed 
of the Chilean Bean, Bayos chicos. This leads to the 
conclusion that it was brought from that country, 
" round the Horn " in the early days of American 
shipping. Round Yellow Six Weeks is a fairly reliable 
sort but does not have the necessary good qualities 
to rate as a leading garden variety. It is quite hardy, 
a good cropper with pod flavor richer than most sorts. 
A second early, 51 days to first pods, or 4 days later 
than those of Bountiful. It is somewhat similar in 
general habit to Bountiful but the foliage is not so 
light colored and is less coarse. The pods are quite 
different from those of Long Yellow Six Weeks as they 
are less curved, shorter, more narrow and much rounder 
in cross-section. The foliage is also finer and more 
compact. In some ways it resembles China Red Eye 
but is a smaller, more open plant with lighter foliage 
and with pods of better quality. Other names that 
are synonyms of Round Yellow Six Weeks are mostly 
variations of arrangement of the descriptive terms early, 
round, yellow, six, and dwarf. 

Plant small to medium 10 to 14 inches tall with spread of 
1 foot; erect, compact, runnerless; vigor good, moderately productive 
with bearing period moderately long. Stem slender, branches few, 
wholly green. Foliage rather abundant, light green, smooth surface, 
crumpled; leaflets medium to small, 3 3 4 inches long, 2 ! 4 inches 
wide nearest base, tapering to long slightly curved point, base 
of leaflet curved to quite rounded. Flowers lilac. Pods borne 
intermediate among the foliage; light, moderately glossy green 
in color. Quality good; stringless, almost fiberless, fleshy, brittle 
and moderately fine in texture. Size long, rather broad and 
moderately slender, (5 J 2~~6i4 x » I Ji inches), containing 6-8 
seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross-section, moderately curved, 
straight backed, regular, fairly well crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and edge and pointed at the end. Spur long, straight and 
slender. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary moderately obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.5 x .8 x .6 cm, (^80—85 per oz.) oblong to long 
oval, occasionally sub-reniform, fairly plump altho at times some- 
what flattened; ends uniformly rounded. Hilum medium in size, 
flat. Color solid (straw yellow) later turning to a light copper 
(pinkish cinnamon) shade, distinctly marked on the younger seed 
with a darker yellowish-brown i^vinaceous-buff) vein-like system 
over the entire surface; a narrow, yellowish brown (sanford's brown) 
eye-ring is present in all instances. 

Satisfaction. Refs. 53. This sort was first offered 
in 1918 by Sutton and won an award of merit from the 
Royal Horticultural Society the next year. It was 
developed as the result of a cross between Superlative 
and Masterpiece and was offered in the United States 
in 1926 by Hunt and others. The straight dark green 
pods made a good appearance for exhibition, the plants 
are hardy, probably most suitable as a forcing bean or 
where the high quality of the young pods is known. The 
pods are ready in from 53-55 days. It is less vigorous 



than the parents, with pods broader than Superlative 
and of a darker green than Masterpiece. In foliage it 
is very similar to Feltham Prolific. 

Plant erect, runnerless, vigor good, yield fair. Foliage 
medium abundant, medium dense, very dark green, crumpled, 
rough, thick, heavy veined. Flowers white cream with age. Pods 
borne intermediate among the foliage; dull light green in color. 
Quality fair; moderately fleshy, fairly brittle, rather stringy and 
fibrous and coarse in texture. Size long, rather broad and slender, 
(7-8x i^x '4 inches', containing about 7 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat, ovate in cross-section, straight to moderately curved, straight 
backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge 
and pointed or tapering at the end. Spur long, moderately slender 
and straight. Suture, placental is flat to slightly indented and 
carpellary, moderately acute. 

Seeds small to medium, 1.3 x .6 x .45 cm, (90— 95 per oz.); 
long reniform, fairly plump, oval thru cross-section; ends abruptly 
rounded and occasionally truncate. Hilum medium, flattened. 
Color pattern, style very similar to Superlative. Medium dark 
brown (snuff brown) over 4 .-, of the surface and patterned with 
snowy white on a portion of one end, sides and dorsal surfaces; 
division line between the two colors is very irregular and in many 
instances spotting occurs in the white area. 

Shah. Refs. 53, 81, 85. Vilmorin introduced 
Shah in 1890, and it was brought to America in 1892. 
As used by the French chefs it was the best bean up 
to its time for the production of the long, slender, green, 
young pods. After a time it was surpassed by Dwarf 
Parisian, introduced several years later. 

Plant strictly dwarf, but tall (l}> feet or more) holding the 
very long pods well off the ground; branches and foliage rather 
scanty; latter very large, dark green, smooth. Flowers lilac. 
Pods 6 to 6 3 4 inches long, about ] i inch wide, slender, nearly round 
in cross-section, fleshy, slightly swollen by beans, slightly and 
regularly curved, with rather long, slender but rigid, curved tip, 
green stringy and fibrous. Seeds about ? $ inch long, ' 4' inch wide, 
and nearly as thick, oblong or kidney shaped, sub-cylindrical, 
with round or slightly truncate ends, slightly unlike in width, 
black. 

Sir Joseph Paxton. Refs. 47, 53, 94. This bean, 
named for the celebrated English Botanist and Editor 
of Paxton's Magazine of Botany, originated in England 
about 1870, and has been grown to some extent in the 
United States. The best American description is that 
of Irish, altho he makes seed color rather dark. It is 
moderately early and very productive; but the pods are 
too short to be desirable for snaps. 

Plant strictly dwarf, 1 \ ■> to 1 '4 feet tall, erect, bushy; leaflets 
medium to small, nearly as broad as long, scarcely wrinkled. Flowers 
blush. Pods green, 4 to 6 inches long, about ' 2 inch wide, straight 
or slightly curved, with short, stout nearly straight tip. Seeds 
almost J _> inch long, rather more than half as wide, oblong or nearly 
cylindrical with rounded ends, shining red or dark tan. 

Solitaire. Refs. 13, Martens gives this name as a 
synonym for Mohawk; however, this variety is quite 
distinct, being much later in season. It was an old 
French variety, described by Burr but probably not 
grown commercially in America. It was discarded in 
France toward the end of the last century. 

Noteworthy for very large plants, 1 ' _> feet tall, with very 
long, spreading branches, but not viny; foliage abundant, fine, light 
gTeen. Pods are like those of Marvel of Paris and the seeds like 
those of Refugee. Nearly two weeks later than Mohawk but 
picking over a much longer season. 

Sunrise. Refs. 53. Originating as the result of a 
cross between Ne Plus Ultra and Perpetual, Sunrise 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



51 



was introduced by Carter in 1913 and received an 
Award of Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society. 
It was tested here recently and found early and very 
productive. 

Plants very much like those of some of the strains of Bountiful 
but with finer, rather darker, almost glossy foliage. Pods of very 
similar shape but half an inch or more shorter, and stringy, tho 
brittle, fine textured and of fine quality in early stages. Seeds much 
like those of Giant Stringless, smaller because more slender, and 
clear brown, darker than Giant, lighter than Burpee Stringless. 

Superlative. Refs. 51, 53. Syn. Magpie. This 
variety is probably of French origin, altho it was intro- 
duced by Sutton in 1909. Its introduction and use in 
this country is more complicated due to its similarity 
with Magpie which was introduced from France in 
1913 by Carter. The two as now found are identical. 
They have been offered as forcing beans because of good 
yield and strong plants. The pods are of good size, 
attractive in appearance, and of good quality when 
young, but with both string and parchment when older. 
Like most of these socalled forcing beans it is a late 
variety, 53-55 days, or about 10 days later than the 
earliest sorts, in season with Satisfaction, Wonder of 
France, and 5 days earlier than Refugee. 

Plant large, 15 to 18 inches tall with 15-inch spread; very 
erect, completely runnerless and somewhat open in habit; vigor good, 
moderate yield over long season. Stem stout, round, ridged below, 
short internodes; branches few, holding pods well off ground, green 
throughout. Foliage medium to abundant, dark green, rather 
coarse, crumpled, rough, thick heavy veining; leaflets 3 3 4 inches 
long, 2 3 4 inches wide with widest part x 4 inch from base, sides 
straight with gradual slope to tip. Flowers white, cream with 
age. Pods borne above foliage, dull, light green in color. Quality 
fair, fairly brittle, partially stringy and of coarse texture. Size 
long, fairly broad, and somewhat plump 7-8 x n x i? inches', 
containing 6—7 seeds per pod. Shape, pod is nearly round, broad 
oval in cross-section, slightly curved, straight backed, regular, 
not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and is pointed or 
tapering at the end. Spur long, moderately slender, and straight. 
Suture, placental is flat to slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds small to medium 1.3 x .6 x .5 cm 85 per oz. I, slender, 
long reniform, quite plump, rounded ends. Hilum small, flat to 
very slightly protuberant. Color shining jet black over four-fifths 
of the surface and patterned with snowy white on a portion of one 
end, sides and dorsal surfaces; division line between the two colors 
is very irregular and in many instances black spotting occurs in 
the white area. In this respect very similar to Satisfaction. 

Taylor Green Pod. Refs. 48, 91. This bean 
originated in Oldham Co., Kentucky, presumably with 
a Mr. Taylor, several years before it was introduced by 
Wood, Stubbs & Co., in 1902. 

It was exceedingly like Round Yellow Six Weeks, but with 
smaller, low-growing, very compact plants and darker foliage, a 
few days earlier, and bearing somewhat flatter, shorter pods, with 
much smaller, very short oval. Seeds approaching spherical. 

Tender Pod. A very distinct variety, apparently 
of foreign origin, locally grown by market gardeners in 
northern California for several years, and listed by 
Morse in 1920. It was grown in trials here for three 
seasons, but apparently is unknown elsewhere except 
about Placerville, California, where it is grown com- 
mercially. This bean was introduced only after very 
careful preliminary testing yet its popularity only 
lasted a few years and it is no longer carried, possibly 



due to the pods which were rather too flat for use as 
snap pods. 

Plant about 1 foot tall, stout-stemmed, somewhat spreading, 
with abundant, medium sized, dark green foliage; flowers blush pink. 
Pods almost straight, broad, nearly as long as those of Bountiful, 
with short, thick, but flexible tips, attractive, waxy light green, 
stringless, fine-textured and of excellent quality. The seeds, 
when old, might be taken for small samples of Burpee Stringless, 
but when fresh are reddish or purplish brown in color, faintly mottled 
over entire surface with lighter brown. The small size and purplish 
tint enable separation of seeds from Burpee Stringless, and the size 
and brown color from Low Champion or Warren. 

Tendergreen. This variety was first introduced 
by Peter Henderson 8c Co. in 1922. The parentage is 
unknown as indicated in a letter from the concern 
written in 1929. The seed of Tendergreen resemble 
in pattern those of Early Refugee, Mohawk, Red 
Valentine, Longfellow, and Full Measure. They have 
some characters in common with each of these varieties, 
yet are truly different in the combination of colors. 
About this same period Henderson also introduced two 
other new varieties. Golden Age I Wax Pod ) and the 
Henderson. Inspection of the seed and plants of these 
1 varieties together with Tendergreen would indicate 
their close relationship and the possibility of their 
coming from the same original cross. One of the parents 
used must have been a wax pod to account for the wax 
pod Golden Age. Since this is a variety with pods of 
good quality it would appear to merit a trial for either 
home garden or market use. There is a tendency on the 
part of growers to plant more of the round podded 
varieties and less of the flat pods. Tendergreen is 
already ten years old and is beginning to be known and 
is making friends wherever grown. At Geneva 47 days 
to the first picking, therefore, it is an early sort, in 
season with Bountiful and Stringless Green Pod; 2 days 
earlier than Full Measure, and 4 days earlier than Red 
Valentine. The plant characters resemble those of Full 
Measure in many ways, especially in the size and shape 
of the leaflets which are also much larger than found 
in other greenpods. The pods are longer than those of 
either Full Measure, Stringless Green Pod or Red 
Valentine although they are narrower in width, one 
noticeable characteristic is that the pods are thicker 
from side to side than from placental to carpellary 
sutures. 

Plant large, 14—15 inches tall with spread of 12 inches; very 
erect, compact growth, entirely without runners, vigor good, 
heavily productive over a short season. Stem very stout, rigid, 
round, smooth, ridged above, internodes short; branches heavy, 
rigid, spreading, green throughout. Foliage abundant, rather 
dense, medium green, crumpled, slightly rough but glossy, thick; 
leaflets large, 5 inches long by 3 3 4 inches wide, quite circular in 
appearance, being widest nearer the middle with rather short 
point. Flowers phlox pink. 

Pods borne below the foliage; dark dull green in color. Quality 
excellent; fleshy, brittle, tender, stringless, fiberless and of fine 
texture. Size medium to long, rather broad and plump, (4}2-6}'2 x 
. x 3 j— rV inches , containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape round, 
nearly circular to broad oval in cross-section, slightly curved, straight- 
backed, regular, rather crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge 
and pointed or tapering at the end. Spur long, medium thick and 
curved — quite flexible. Suture, placental is slightly indented and 
carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 



52 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Seeds medium to large (1.5 x .75 .5 cm, 65 per oz.), oblong, 
sub-reniform, plump; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. Hilum 
small, flat, portion of placental suture often adhering to it. Color 
varying in intensity of brownish black over greater portion of the 
surface, mottled and blotched with light fawn (vinaceous-buff i 
which later turns to a darker shade (cinnamon-rufous). 

Tennessee Green Pod. Refs. 41, 48, 91. Syns. 
Brown Bunch, Fields First Early, Knife Blade. This 
bean was introduced in 1904 by D. M. Ferry with the 
notation " Although new to the seed trade, it has for 
many years been grown in the south," now nearly thirty 
years later it is quite generally listed by both southern 
and northern seed houses. In 1907 Henry Field listed 
it as Fields First Early and at least since 1923 the 
Springfield Seed Company has carried both Tennessee 
Green Pod and Knife Blade. Since this variety is 
quite distinct from other North America beans, it 
probably was brought to this country by some new 
settler. 

In the South it is used as an early home garden 
variety. Pods are ready to pick in about 47 days, 
making this one of the earliest varieties in our trials. It 
is in season with Bountiful and Stringless Green Pod 
and earlier than Full Measure and Black Valentine. 
The general growth habit is somewhat similar to the 
varieties Emperor William and Early Market, but the 
plants have somewhat darker foliage and branches that 
are more spreading. The foliage color also resembles 
some of the French Green Seeded sorts, in particular 
Dwarf Soissons. 

Plant is different from other green pod bush varieties, very 
dwarf, stocky, rarely over 1-foot tall but wide spreading in row with 
long jointed fruit-spurs and semi-runners trailing on ground. 
Vigorous, hardy, susceptible to blight, only medium in yield. 
Stem very thick, round, ridged above, internodes long; branches 
few, wholly green. Foliage abundant, very dark green, (among 
the darkest), thick, crumpled, medium to heavy veining; leaf large, 
rough, wrinkled, 43 2 inches x 4} 2 inches, very wide across leaflets, 
widest at rounded base, regular taper with sides incurved to short 
point. Flowers white, turning cream with age. 

Pods borne well above foliage, medium dark dull green in 
color. Quality fair, somewhat tough, stringy and coarse in texture. 
Size medium to long, broad and fairly plump iS'j-7 x 5s- 3 4 x y^ 
inches) containing 4—7 seeds in a pod. Shape somewhat flattened, 
ovate in cross-section, straight to slightly curved, straight backed, 
constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and 
rounded to blunt on the end. Spur medium long, slender, flexible 
and recurved. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.3 x .8 x .6 cm, (70-75 per oz.), broad-oval, 
occasionally somewhat flat; well rounded ends. Hilum small, 
flat. Color medium brown (buckhorn brown) over the entire 
surface with a very slight greenish under color suggested, and 
marked with an obscure narrow, reddish brown eye-ring. 

Tom Thumb. Refs. 48. Denaiffe introduced 
Tom Thumb in 1895, as a sport from Flageolet Mammoth 
(his Incomparable), it was brought to the United States 
by Landreth in 1903 and carried two years; but was not 
listed by others. 

Like Triumph in plant; with short pods, 3 1 ', to 4 inches long, 
fleshy, slightly flattened, with short necks, slightly curved; seeds 
broader, shorter, and more oblong than those of Triumph, light 
green. Denaiffe says hardiness and disease resistance claimed for 
variety, but not evident to him; while pods are not well held, being 
liable to become soil stained, and are too short and too flat to be 
attractive; not very productive. 



Triumph of the Frames. Refs. 47, 48, 49, 51, 

91. Syn. Triumph. This is a variety which belongs to 
a race of beans very popular in France and grown not so 
much for edible pods as for green shell beans or dry green 
colored beans. Triumph was originated by Vilmorin and 
introduced by him in 1892 as Triomphe des Chassis. 
Thorburn in 1894 was the first in this country to list the 
variety describing it as " a dwarf green seeded variety 
which by its extreme earliness and small size is the best 
of all for growing in frames." In 1931 it was found 
in the catalogs of only four out of 125 leading seedsmen. 
Twenty-five years ago it appeared more frequently 
but since our markets are supplied with beans from 
southern gardens the forcing varieties are no longer 
grown. This is a productive sort for good quality snap 
beans when picked very small, but its chief value is 
when used for green shell beans of fine flavor and green 
color. Midseason to late, 52 days or from 5 to 7 days 
later than the earliest sorts. It is quite similar to 
Wonder of Frame but with finer foliage and with shorter, 
slenderer pods and seeds which are somewhat longer, 
slenderer, and flatter. 

Plant very small, 8 to 12 inches high with spread of 1-foot 
very erect, compact, runnerless; vigor fair to good, hardy, produc- 
tive of moderate bearing period. Stem stout, short, round, ridged 
above; branches many, with some secondaries, green throughout. 
Foliage abundant, somewhat dense, dark green, glossy, rough 
surface, very crumpled, medium to heavy veined, slight pubescence, 
thick; leaflets medium to large, 4'^ inches long by 2 :i 4 inches wide, 
widest at middle, irregularly square or trapezoidal in outline, 
distinctly pointed with long tip. Flowers white, cream with age. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; dark glossy 
green in color. Quality poor, except when very small, stringy, 
tough, quite fibrous, but fine in texture. Size medium short, rather 
narrow, and slender (4J^— 5 x 3 g—£g inches), containing 4-5 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross-section, moderately and uni- 
formly curved, straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip and edge and tapering at the end. Spur moderately 
long, slender and recurved. Suture, placental is flattened to slightly 
rounded and carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds small, 1.25 x .6 x .4 cm, (165-170 per oz.i, reniform, 
rather flattened; ends rounded and occasionally somewhat truncate. 
Hilum medium, flattened to slightly protuberant. Color very light 
green (water green) over entire surface, marked with a darker, 
vein-like under pattern. 

Unique. Refs. 47, 93, 94. Seedsmen in France 
still list this very old variety; but apparently it is known 
in the United States only through Irish's trials and 
descriptions. It is said not to be entirely fiberless, but 
originally it showed parchment late in the snap-bean 
stage. 

Plant 1' 4 ' to l'o feet tall, much branched, with some runners, 
holding pods rather poorly so that they are often soil-stained. 
Foliage deep green, blistered, thick, with quite large, almost round 
leaflets. Flowers white. Pods 4 to 6 inches long, J > inch wide, 
flattened, considerably curved, green. Seeds 5-6, } ■> inch or more 
long, more than half as broad, plump, oblong or slightly kidney- 
shaped, with rounded, rarely truncate, ends. White. 

Ventre <1«- Biche. This is an old French variety 
that has long since passed from cultivation. It has 
been grown in America only in tests at this Station in 
1883. 

Plant dwarf, vigorous, forming large bushes, with pods 
sometimes borne above the abundant, grayish green, slightly rough- 










' 



Natural size 



TRIUMPH OF THE FRAMES 




Natural size* 



SUNRISE 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



53 



ened foliage. Pcds long, straight, almost cylindrical, stringy, and 
fibrous. Seeds large, about 90 to the ounce, :! 4 inch or more long, 
less than half as wide, oblong rather than kidney shaped, clear buff, 
light dun with veiny markings, 01 yellowish brown with dark 
yellowish ring about the eye. 

\ ictoria. Refs. 13, 53. Burr described this as 
one of the earliest varieties, with edible pods in 7 weeks; 
but it was probably grown mainly for green shell beans, 
since the pods were tough and stringy. 

Plants l 1 ,; to 1} -j feet. Branches few. Flowers purple. 
Pods 4'_> to 5 inches long, green streaked and spotted purple, 
tough and parchment like when ripe. Seeds 5 or 6, about : ' s inch 
long, not quite half as wide, oblong, slightly flattened, compressed 
at ends, flesh-colored, striped and spotted purplish, darkening to 
dull reddish brown and chocolate brown. 

Vienna. Refs. 48, 91. This is a variety of 
European origin brought to the United States by Thor- 
burn in 1900. It was vigorous, hardy, very early, and 
moderately productive, but the pods, as commonly used 
in America, are tough, coarse-textured, and very stringy. 
In Europe, where the pods are used when quite small 
it was classed as a standard forcing bean. 

Rather tall dwarf, vigorous, somewhat straggly in growth. 
Foliage slightly crumpled, rough, medium green. Flowers white. 
Pods 5 to 5 3 4 inches long, narrow ovate in cross-section, slightly 
curved, with long tip, green. Seeds like Long Yellow Six Weeks 
in shape, and size, or possibly a trifle broader, and colored like Old- 
fashioned Yellow Eye. 

Warren. Refs. 41, 48, 49, 59, 80, 88, 91. This 
was a shell bean of some merit that originated with 
David Warren, Essex County, Mass. It was grown 
locall> for some years and introduced commercially 
about 1882 by Gregory and others. Its use and value 
are the same as those of Low's Champion to which it is 
very similar. 

In our tests, plants and pods were indistinguishable from those 
of Low's Champion. Seeds were slightly smaller, slightly ovate, 
rounded at ends, very seldom truncate, darker in color, black with 
violet tint. 

Warwick. Refs. 27, 29, 47, 48, 51, 53, 59, 81, 
85, 91. Henderson brought this variety from England 
to America about 1890 and it was quite highly com- 
mended both in England, where it was called an Improved 
Early Fullmer, and in America. It was listed by several 
seedsmen and carried for at least fifteen years. At 
the time of its introduction and for some years later, 
it was considered the earliest snap bean, and the second 
earliest green-shell bean; for which use, however, the 
seeds were rather small. 

Differed from Red Valentine only in plants having rather 
more rigid stems, pink rather than white flowers, flat rather than 
rounded pods, more stringy and of poorer quality. Seeds decidedly 
shorter and more plump, ovoid, with greater area of surface covered 
with the reddish purple color. 

White Advancer. Refs. 51, 53. This English 
variety was apparently introduced by Carter about 1873, 
when it received a First Class Certificate from the 
Royal Horticultural Society. It reached the United 
States very promptly, being distributed in 1874 by 
Crosman Bros., Rochester, N. Y.; but was never widely 
grown. 

Much like White Flageolet; but the seeds were longer, almost 



cylindrical, and shaded yellowish cream about the eye. The flat 
straight pods were edible in early stages only. 

^hite Lyonnaise. Refs. 47. This is one of 
the very few representatives of Martens carinate or 
" keeled " beans, the seeds of which are marked by a 
distinct ridge or keel where the dorsal edges of the 
cotyledons meet. This white-seeded strain was intro- 
duced by Vilmorin in 1895. It is a midseason variety, 
useful both as a snap pod or green-shell bean. 

Plant rather tall dwarf bean, 1>4 to l'^ feet or more, very 
vigorous, much branched. Foliage abundant, light green, thick, 
rough, with large leaflets, almost as broad as long. Flowers blush 
pink. Pods 4-5 inches long, much curved, slender, almost round, 
with long-pointed ends and rather long curved tip, green, fiberless. 
Seeds 5-9, ' 2 inch long or more, nearly half as broad, plump, oblong 
with well-rounded ends, carinate as above. Yellowish white or 
very light brown. 

\t hite Model. Refs. 65. This was one of the 

varieties introduced by Carter in 1918, simultaneously 
in England and America, as the result of a cross between 
Sunrise and Improved Longsword. As grown here, it 
was very early and very productive of long pods with 
fair quality as snaps; but the seeds were rather small 
for green -shell beans. 

Plants about like those of White Kidney, possibly a little 
shorter, but branching higher with some secondary branches, and 
with rather smaller, slenderer leaflets. Pods longer, narrower, 
rounder in cross-section, fleshier, and with but little string. Seeds 
5-6, smaller, distinctly more flattened and more glossy white than 
those of White Kidney, otherwise very similar. 

Willmot. Refs. 47, 56. The only American record 
appears to be that of the test at the Missouri Botanical 
Garden, when the variety was at least a half-century 
old. It was an old English forcing bean, known also 
in Germany but apparently not in France. Mcintosh 
says it was an excellent forcing variety, quite similar to 
Fullmer's Early, but distinct; productive. 

Plant under 1-foot, but with some runners; leaflets small, 
nearly as broad as long, deep green, thin, papery. Blossoms 
purplish. Pods 3 to 5 inches long, half an inch wide or less, slightly 
curved, with short stout spur, green, crisp and tender while young. 
Seeds very small, less than one-half inch long, more than half as 
broad, thick, compressed at the ends, usually truncate, yellowish, 
brown with dark eye-ring. 

Wonder. This variety received an award of Merit 
from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1924, this was 
the year previous to its introduction to America by 
Watkins & Simpson. It is evidently a descendant, 
by selection or crossing, of Feltham Prolific; but with 
pods as long as those of Satisfaction. Unfortunately 
the quality of the pods was not as much improved as 
their appearance, although they are produced early and 
abundantly. This is quite distinct from Wonder Forc- 
ing tho both are listed under the name Wonder. 

Pods slender, round and plump, straight rather dull light green; 
and with 6 seeds, largest of the series, about 70 to the ounce, with 
brown areas larger, with brown spots quite numerous in small 
white areas, and with the dark eye-ring of Satisfaction often sep- 
arated from the brown by narrow white lines. 

Wonder Forcing. This variety is of rather 
uncertain identity but is apparently Veitch's Early 
Wonder. It is said to be a seedling of Smythe's Hybrid, 
differing in pods and seed color. Seeds of Smythe's 



54 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Hybrid are black or brownish black; while those of 
Wonder are deep, dull black. Wonder was grown here 
from seeds sent on our order for that variety, but labelled 
Green Podded Forcing. It was very early and fairly 
productive; the pods were rather tough, stringy, but 
only moderately fibrous. This is quite distinct from 
the Wonder of Watkins & Simpson. 

Plant about 1-foot tall, erect, stems rather slender, branching, 
few, without secondaries. Foliage moderately abundant, rather 
light green, not glossy nor rough, thin. Leaflets of medium size, 
broadest one-third from base, quite sharply pointed. Flowers 
pink. Pods borne singly, 5 inches or more in length, less than one- 
half inch broad, very broad oval to almost round in cross-section, 
slightly curved, not constricted, with pointed ends and long, fairly 
heavy, rigid, curved tips, light green, silvered. Seeds 5 or 6, 
occasionally reaching one-half inch in length, broad oval or slightly 
kidney-shaped, not plump, ends short-rounded, rarely truncate, 
equal in width, deep black, dull to almost polished. 

Wonder of France. Wonder of France originated 
with Bonnemain, who introduced it to French growers 
in 1884. It reached America the next year; and was 
grown here in recent tests. It is in the same class with 
Triumph of the Frames, and by some, considered 
synonymous. Both varieties are still offered in American 
catalogs. 

Plant dwarf, about l 1 ,^ feet, erect but spreading, much 
branched, not viny, vigorous. Foliage medium in amount, dark 
green. Leaflets medium to large, widest at middle, irregularly 
square or trapezoidal in outline, distinctly pointed; flowers white or 
cream, rather large. Pods 4}i to 4?4 inches long, sometimes 
5 or more, about ; ! g inch wide, half as thick, ovate in cross-section, 
considerably too much curved, very regular and smooth, with 
rounded ends and long, rigid, moderately heavy tip, dark, dull 
green, decidedly stringy, fibrous, of rather fine texture but poor 
quality. Seeds 6, kidney-shaped, more flattened than those of 
Chevrier, less than those of Triumph; nearly }■> inch long, about 
160 to the ounce. 

WAX PODS 

Alexander Black Wax. Refs. 45. This was grown 
at Geneva in 1889, with seed received from Alexander. 
The plants were the tallest and had the earliest pods of 
several black seeded wax beans grown that season; but 
it was also the least productive, which probably accounts 
for its early disappearance in trade lists. 

Plant 1 ?4 feet tall. Foliage light green. Flowers pale 
pink. Pods usually single, 4 to 4}> inches long, curved at apex, 
yellowish white and somewhat wrinkled when ready as string beans. 
Seeds black. 

Allan Imperial Wax. Refs. 41, 48, 91. Syns. 
Imperial Golden Wax, Salzer's Earliest Wax. This 
variety was originated by Allan and introduced by him 
in 1890 and by Vaughan in 1901. A few years later it 
was listed by about a dozen seedsmen, but never became 
very popular and was soon dropped. In season it was a 
second early, moderately productive, with flat, long, 
large, and straight pods. 

Plant rather more than a foot tall, erect, heavy-stemmed, 
runnerless; leaflets large, broad, medium green in color, rough 
and slightly crumpled. Flowers white. Pods longest of flat- 
podded wax beans, slightly curved, very broad, flat, with rounded 
ends and long, straight, heavy tips, tough, stringy, fibrous, coarse- 
textured, and of poor quality, very late in yellowing, frequently 
green-shaded, occasionally solid light green. Seeds 5-6, 55 to 
the ounce, » inch long, more than half as wide, very broad-oval 
or oblong, tending to kidney-shaped, quite plump, but not round 



in cross-section; white, with markings similar to, but larger than 
those of Detroit Wax. 

Amber Wax. The only record of Amber Wax is 
from the 1890 catalog of Delano Bros., Lee Park, 
Nebraska. The description indicates a fine, showy 
variety, plant bushy, with stiff stalks, bearing long, 
round pods containing 7 to 9 beans, amber colored when 
ripe. The seed of Dwarf Butter is of the same light 
brown color. 

Asprow Wax White Seeded. Syn. Keeney's 
White Seeded Refugee Wax. As first introduced pre- 
vious to 1927 this bean was known as Keeney's White- 
seeded Refugee Wax, but the name as given above is 
now used by the Associated Seed Growers, the organi- 
zation with which N. B. Keeney & Sons became affiliated 
in 1927. Asgrow Wax is the result of a cross between the 
old-fashioned, dark-seeded Refugee Wax and White 
Marrowfat, the well-known field bean. As grown in 
our trials at Geneva in 1930, we were unable to link 
this variety with any other group of wax pods. Evi- 
dently certain plant characters from the White Marrow- 
fat have made this variety quite individual when com- 
pared to other Wax Beans. The foliage and growth 
habit differ especially from other sorts. This variety is 
of too recent introduction to determine its true useful- 
ness. It has high quality and is suggested for use as a 
cut bean for canning. The value of white-seeded 
varieties for canning is great because the dark-seeded 
parts show color as soon as the pods begin to assume a 
round-podded shape. The pods were ready to pick in 
about 53 days, or 2 to 3 days later than the Refugee 
Wax and Pencil Pod groups. 

Plant small, 10 to 12 inches tall with equal spread, very 
erect and compact, runnerless; vigor fair, moderate in yield and 
bearing period. Stem short, thick, rigid; branches rather many 
for size of plant, green thruout. Foliage medium abundant but 
very compact and dense, dark green leaves with smooth surface, 
fine veining, very slight pubescence, thin; leaflets long, rather nar- 
row, generally curled with the terminal leaflet reversed. Flowers 
white. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage; light yellow in color. 
Quality good to excellent; very fleshy, brittle, fiberless, tender, 
stringless until late in edible stage and fine in texture. Size 
short to medium, quite broad and plump (3 ! £-4j ■> x \ £-$ s x ' ■<-* s 
inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly cir- 
cular thru cross-section, curved, especially so near spur end, hump- 
backed, slightly constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and the edge, and rounded at the end. Spur short, moderately 
stout and straight. Suture, placental is rounded, likewise the 
carpellary. 

Seeds small, 1.15 x .7 x .6 cm. containing 95—100 per oz. 
Shape short oval, broad oval thru cross-section, end abruptly 
rounded, occasionally blunt and nearly truncate, dorsal surface 
sometimes inclined to be rather wedge-like. Hilum very small, 
and slightly protuberant. Color dull white, marked with a vein- 
like net work over the entire surface and with a slight yellowish 
tinged, indistinct eye-ring. 

Bismarck Wax. Refs. 27, 41, 48, 49, 59, 61, 63, 
91. Buist brought Bismarck from Germany in 1889, 
and introduced it the following year. On the Berlin 
markets, where Mr. Buist saw it in 1887, it was said to 
be a favorite sort, apparently much like Currie Wax in 
earliness, hardiness, and productivity, but with curved, 
round pods, slightly better in quality, but not really 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



55 



suitable for home use because of stringiness. The seeds 
were smaller and proportionately shorter than those of 
Currie Wax, ovoid rather than oblong, " solid black." 
The variety never became popular in America. 

Black-Eyed Wax. Refs. 9, 15, 16, 27, 28, 29, 

48, 49, 61, 63, 91, 96. A variety of American origin 
said to have resulted from a cross between Black Wax 
and Golden Wax, and introduced in 1887 by both 
Henderson and Burpee. For a time it was quite popular, 
being listed by 30 seedsmen in 1901, but in 1907 it was 
reported by Tracy as almost out of cultivation. Now 
it is almost unknown. Grown at Geneva in 1894, it 
was found to be early, of quite long season, and quite 
productive. 

Plant large to medium, about lj^ feet tall, erect, stiff- 
stemmed, runnerless; foliage medium in size and color. Flowers 
white. Pods 4 3 4 to 5 '2 inches long, somewhat curved, oval in 
cross-section (.Tracy) (thicker than wide, Denaiffe), deep yellow, 
very fleshy, brittle, stringless, fiberless, of good quality. Seeds 
5 or 6, rather more than J jj inch long, or broad, very plump, kidney 
shaped, white with large semi-solid or somewhat " butterfly " 
shaped black splotch about the eye, apparently much like Kidney 
Wax. 

Boston Dwarf. Refs. 97, 98. Gregory first listed 
this bean in 1883, the next year after it had been grown 
in the trials at Geneva. No information as to its origin 
has been discovered nor does the color of its seed give 
any clue when noted in comparison with color of seed 
of present-day wax beans. Gregory in his description 
claims it to be superior to German Black Wax in vigor 
and productivity. Wing's notes speak of two types, 
differing somewhat in height of plants, color and size 
of foliage, and color, amount of curvature, and relative 
slenderness of pods, but he describes and gives data for 
only one. 

Plants bushy, not much branched, runnerless, stems often 
shaded red; foliage somewhat scanty, medium green; leaflets of 
medium size, taper-pointed. Flowers blush pink. Pods 3 to 
4 inches long, straight or slightly curved, with short, stout tips 
about } 2 inch wide, ovate in cross-section, fleshy when ready for 
use, shrinking much in ripening becoming much contracted between 
seeds, stringless and of good quality, yellow. Seeds 3 or 4, not 
quite J 2 inch long, half as wide and as thick as wide, slightly kidney- 
shaped, varying in color from dark dun to dark brown. 

Brittle Wax. Refs. 41, 48, 69, 77, 91, 99. Syns. 
Round Pod Kidney Wax, New Round Pod Kidney, 
Kidney Wax Round Pod. Confusion exists between 
varieties of black-eyed or very dark brown-eyed wax 
beans. In the growers' lists of today 12 different names 
occur. Close inspection of the seeds and of the growing 
plants and pod characters would indicate only two 
varieties with perhaps strains which differ but slightly. 
Of these similar varieties, Round Pod Kidney Wax was 
probably the earliest in origin, having been introduced 
in 1900 by Johnson and Stokes. Brittle Wax was 
introduced as Twentieth Century Dwarf Wax the year 
following, the name being changed to Brittle Wax in 
1902 as the result of a prize name contest. Four years 
later, in 1906, Burpee introduced the Burpee Kidney 
Wax and Maule the same year his Improved Butter 
Wax. The first three of these originated with Keeney 
and the last with Rogers Bros. Thirty years after the 



type was introduced it is exceedingly difficult to separate 
the varieties and impossible to assign the synonyms of 
each with certainty. Many types and strains have 
been grown here in our recent tests and compared as 
carefully as the decidedly variant material admits. 
Not only do the brown-eyed seeds become black-eyed 
with age, but these colors and shades are sometimes 
actually reversed from parent to progeny or when grown 
under a different environment. (Ref. Owens Journ. 
Agr. Res. 37:435. 1928.) The four names given 
above and eight others using a different arrangement of 
the same words are commonly found in the trade lists. 
While very minor differences may occur, it is significant 
that nearly all handlers of bean seeds, whether growers 
or retailers, list only 2 of the 12 names. Brittle Wax 
and Round Pod Kidney Wax being very nearly identical, 
we have chosen the name Brittle Wax to represent the 
group which has seeds that show the brown coloring 
the more often and the name Kidney Wax to represent 
the other form of the dark brown black-eyed wax sorts, 
this latter group showing the smaller amount of eye 
marking. 

Brittle Wax came from a cross between Black-eyed 
Wax and Round-pod Refugee. It is, therefore, a half- 
brother of Round-pod Kidney Wax and Pencil Pod 
Black Wax through the Round-pod Refugee parentage. 
Brittle Wax in quality is one of the very best of the 
wax pods, although it is not superior to Pencil Pod 
Black Wax in this respect. It is a variety suitable for all 
uses, home garden, market, and canning. It is widely 
grown as a canning bean because of the long, fiberless 
pods, only slightly curved at the tip, and with exceed- 
ingly good color. The seed develops slowly and shows 
very little pigment. It is used both as a cut bean and 
for canning whole. Brittle Wax grows best on sandy 
loam soils and yields its best only under very favorable 
conditions. In season, a second early, 50 days at 
Geneva, this is only 4 days later than Challenge Black 
Wax, 2 to 3 days later than Wardwell's, the same in 
season with Pencil Pod, Delicious Wax, and Golden 
Wax, and possibly 2 days earlier than Stringless Refugee 
Wax. As originally offered, Brittle Wax differed slightly 
from Round Pod Kidney Wax, but most seedsmen 
catalog them as similar. Keeney considered Brittle 
Wax the finer but more delicate of the two. As grown 
here, plants of Brittle Wax were about 2 inches taller 
and more erect in early stages, but similarly spreading 
later, pods more curved, more slender when viewed 
sidewise, and slightly more constricted. Except for the 
seed and flower color, Brittle Wax is very similar to 
Pencil Pod Black Wax, the plants are not as large, 
vigorous, or productive, and the foliage is lighter in 
color and the pods slightly smaller. 

Plant large, 14 to 16 inches tall, spread in row about 15 inches, 
erect early, somewhat drooping as pods enlarge, more spreading 
in habit when fully grown; vigorous, only moderately productive 
over long bearing period. Stems rather slender, smooth, short 
internodes, base short; only moderately branched, rarely with sec- 
ondary branches, but without runners, green thruout. Foliage 
abundant, medium green; leaf surface almost glossy, rough, occa- 
sionally slightly crumpled, medium thick; leaflets large, 4% to 



56 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



5 1 i inches long by 3'j to 3'i> inches wide, somewhat below center, 
rather rounding with abruptly taperpointed tips, laterals often 
quite irregular. Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light whitish 
yellow in color. Quality excellent; brittle, stringless, fleshy, fiber- 
less, and fine in texture. Size long, rather broad and quite plump 



(5V6 :1 4 x 



x :; v inches), containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape 



round, broad cordate to nearly circular in cross-section, moderately 
to much curved, creasebacked, slightly constricted, crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge and rounded at the end. Spurs 
long, slender and curved to sharply hooked. Suture, placental is 
indented and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.45 x .7 x .6 cm. (80-90 per oz.); slender to 
medium reniform, plump; ends rounded. Hilum small, flattened. 
Color chalky white, marked with grayish vein-like under pattern 
and with a very dark brown, later turning to black, pattern in 
the form of a broken eye-ring quite variable as to shape, but always 
on the hilar surface and occasionally as a strip over one or both 
ends. 

Burpee White Wax. Refs. 10, 15, 45, 48, 59, 64, 

67, 68, 91. The exact parentage of the Burpee White 
Wax is unknown, but it probably came as a simple 
selection from the old variety White Wax. The new 
strain was introduced by Burpee in 1905 and came from 
Keeney who had made the selection some years previous. 
Only four seedsmen listed it in 1931, indicating its 
limited use. The pods are ready to use in about 50 
days, the same as for Golden Wax. Burpee White 
Wax differs from Michigan White Wax in having taller, 
more compact plants, larger leaflets, wider and flatter 
pods, with more pointed ends and longer tips. As first 
introduced, it was superior to Davis Wax or Wardwell's 
Kidney Wax, and quite similar to Keeney Rustless and 
the older forms of White Wax. 

Plant 14 to 16 inches tall with spread of 15 inches; erect, 
very compact, bushy appearance, runnerless; good vigor, moderately 
productive over long bearing season. Stem stout, round, smooth, 
ridged above; branches few, rather rigid yet sometimes drooping 
as pods reach green shell stage, green thruout. Foliage abundant, 
medium green, dull, fairly smooth, slightly crumpled; leaflets 4'^ 
inches long and 3 3 4 inches wide, broad for length, widest nearest 
base, sides taper gradually to short, full point, slightly curved at 
tip. Flowers white. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage, light to medium yellow 
in color. Quality good; stringless, nearly fiberless, quite fleshy, 
brittle and fine in texture. Size, short, broad, and slender (4J-2— 
4 ' i x T5~/1s x J4- 3 ., inches), containing 4-5 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat, ovate in cross-section, straight to slightly curved, straight to 
slightly creasebacked, somewhat constricted along placental surface 
as well as on the sides, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and 
edge and rounded on the end. Spur short, moderately stout and 
curved. Suture, placental is flattened to slightly indented and 
carpellary, moderately acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.25 x .75 x .6 cm. (80-86 per oz.), quite 
uneven, oblong, slightly reniform, quite plump, oval to moderately 
broad ova! in cross-section; ends uniformly rounded. Hilum small 
and moderately protuberant. Color chalky white over the entire 
surface; marked with a rather indistinct vein-like under pattern. 

Challenge Black Wax. Refs. 36, 47, 48, 49, 59, 

67, 68, 85, 91, 97, 98. Syns. Challenge Dwarf Black 
Wax, Challenge, Challenge German Black Wax. 
Although plainly of German Black Wax type, this variety 
must be classed as a distinct variety in plant, foliage, 
pod, and seasonal differences. It is said to have orig- 
inated with Rogers Brothers, of Chaumont, N. Y., 
from a single plant found in a bean field grown from 
German seed. D. M. Ferry introduced the variety in 



1891 as Challenge Dwarf Black Wax Extra Early. It 
was exceedingly popular for a time, being listed by about 
60 seedsmen in 1901, but since then it has been gradually 
superseded by other varieties, appearing in less than 20 
catalogs in 1921. As an early round pod wax it is a 
useful home garden sort. The earliest of our garden 
beans, 46 days to the first pods, 4 to 6 days earlier than 
Pencil Pod or Sure Crop. The plants and pods of 
Challenge, while resembling German Black Wax in 
many ways, are much smaller in all respects. 

Plant very small, ?| to 1 inch tall with spread of % inch; 
stocky, erect, compact, while plant can be said to be stocky its small 
size shows low vigor and weakness; entirely without runners; vigor 
fair, unproductive, short bearing season. Stem stout, round, 
smooth, ridged above; branches few, purplish at nodes and on 
flower stalks. Foliage medium in amount, medium green, leaf 
surface slightly rough or crumpled, rather glossy; leaflets about as 
broad as long, 3' £ inches long x 3 inches wide, widest near base of 
leaf, triangular, straight sided, rather long, acute tip. Flowers rose 
purple. 

Pods borne very largely below the foliage; medium dull 
yellow in color. Quality good; stringless, quite fleshy, brittle and 
fine in texture. Size moderately short, narrow and very plump 



(3} £-4 x 



[ 2 inches I, containing 4—5 seeds per pod. 



Shape round, nearly circular in cross-section, much curved, occa- 
sionally twisted sideways, straight backed, regular, fairly well 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and the edge and tapering at the 
end. Spur moderately long, fairly stout and decidedly recurved. 
Suture, placental is somewhat rounded and carpellary, broadly 
obtuse. 

Seeds small to medium, 1.5 x .75 x .6 cm., containing 95-100 
per oz. Shape somewhat cylindrical, occasionally sub-reniform, 
quite plump, broad oval thru cross-section; ends abruptly rounded 
and occasionally truncate. Hilum small and flat with a tendency 
for a portion of the placental tissue to adhere occasionally. Color 
jet, medium dull black over the entire surface. 

Craeker Jaek Wax. Refs. 77. Syns. Clifford 
Wonder, Admiral Wax, Clifford New Early Wonder 
Wax, Vanguard, Webber Wax. The year 1913 saw 
the introduction of a new bean under several different 
listings, the exact origin or parentage being unknown. 
Cracker Jack was listed by Leonard Seed Company as 
a new bean of distinct character having been in the 
hands of a few Chicago gardeners before its reselection 
and perfection by the seed company. In 1913 the name 
Webber Wax also appeared, having been listed by Forbes 
of Plymouth, Indiana, and Breck of Boston. The 
same year Simon of Philadelphia carried Cracker Jack 
and likewise Tait of Norfolk advertised a variety called 
Vanguard or Cracker Jack. Beans grown under these 
three names and also as Clifford Wonder greatly resemble 
each other. As a type it appears more like a yellow- 
podded strain of Bountiful, deserving the name yellow- 
podded or Golden Podded Bountiful more than the 
black-seeded variety that now bears these names. In 
season it is an early variety. The pods are ready to 
pick in from 47 to 49 days, making it only a few days 
behind the very earliest sorts, the same in season with 
Wardwell's, Sure Crop and Kidney Wax, or 2 days earlier 
than Pencil Pod and Davis Wax. The pods are not 
quite so flat, but are rounder, and more meaty than pods 
of Wardwell's. Because of its drought-resistant quali- 
ties, it is more popular with midwestern than with eastern 
growers. 








? 



STRINGLESS KING OF THE WAX 




ROUND POD KIDNEY WAX 







WEBBER WAX 




DWARF WAX PODS 



'Natural size 




(Natural sizei 



PERPETUAL OR EVERBEARING WAX 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



57 



Plant small to medium, 12 to 15 inches high with spread of 
10 to 14 inches: erect, compact, runnerless; vigor good, quite pro- 
ductive over moderate bearing period. Stem stout, round, smooth, 
ridged slightly above: branches decidedly few, from near base or 
at midstem, both stem and branches showing purplish shading at 
and near nodes. Foliage abundant, rather dull medium to dark 
green, purplish shaded later becoming distinctly brownish, rough 
medium thickness: leaflets of medium size, 4'_> by 3 inches, widest 
near base, distinctly rounded, ending in moderately long, somewhat 
tapering tip. Flowers white or cream at opening. 

Pods borne very largely below the foliage; light waxy yellow 
in color. Quality fair to good; quite brittle, nearly stringless, 
almost fiberless but somewhat coarse in texture. Size long, fairly 
broad and slender v5— 6 x ';s yi inches), containing 5 seeds per pod. 
Shape flat, ovate in cross-section, slightly curved, moderately 
straight-backed, fairly regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and edge and long rounded to pointed on the end. Spur long, 
slender, and moderately curved. Suture, placental is rounded to 
flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.45 x. 7 x .55 cm. containing 65-75 per 
oz. Shape long oval to sub-reniform, oval thru cross-section; 
ends uniformly and abruptly rounded. Hilum medium and flat 
to very slightly protuberant. Color buff I cream-buff to chamois) 
over the entire surface, occasionally tinged with pure yellow on 
certain portions but almost never over the entire surface. Marked 
with a two-toned, moderately broad eye-ring, the outer one being 
wider and more irregular than the inner and also shaded with a darker 
brown saccardo's umber I, while the inner portion is much lighter 
in color vorange cinnamon,). 

Crystal Wax. Refs. 10, 15, 16, 41, 48, 50, 61, 63, 

66. 69, 91, 97, 98, 99. Syns. Cabbage Wax, Crystal 
White Wax, Ice Bean, Ivory Pod, Silver Wax. A 
variety long in cultivation under various forms and 
names. The variety as named above was listed by 
Sibley in 1883 and by Ferry in 1884, by Gregory in 1882 
as Chrystal White Wax, and by Salzer in 1904 as the 
Silver Bean. Ivory Pod Wax, Ice Bean, and other 
names have also been used, and when grown in test 
have exhibited only slight differences from Crystal Wax. 
No earlier history as to time of introduction or manner 
of origination has been found. This variety is interesting 
because of the color of the pods, but has little practical 
value except to the canner as a bottle pickler when the 
pods are quite young. In season late, 59 days to first 
pods, 10 days later than Refugee Wax, or the same as 
Hodson Wax. The vine is similar in growth habit to 
Refugee Wax, except for the runnerlike branches. The 
pods are somewhat the same shape as Refugee Wax, but 
are shorter and of different color. The seed is similar to 
seed of Navy Field Bean. 

Plant small and slow growing, 10 to 12 inches high; erect 
but very spreading in habit with many runnerlike branches trailing 
on ground; vigor fair, long season, moderately productive. Stem 
rather slender, round tending to angular, internodes very short; 
branches many. Foliage abundant, medium green, glossy, smooth, 
medium thickness and veining; leaflets small as Refugee but less 
slender, 3 3 4 inches long and 2} ■> inches wide, terminal leaflet widest 
at Jj distance from base, secondary leaflets widest at base; angle 
of one side of leaflets with base quite squared, long taper to rather 
slender point. Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the leaves; whitish or gray- 
ish green in color. Quality good; brittle, stringy, very small amount 
of fiber, and fine texture. Size short, medium broad, and quite 
plump 3 '4-4 x 3 , x } 4 inches), containing 3—4 seeds per pod. Shape 
round, broad oval to nearly circular in cross-section, slightly curved, 
creasebacked, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and 
edge and rounded on the end. Spur short, medium slender, straight 



and occasionally slightly curved. Suture, placental is slightly 
indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds very small, 1 x .6 x .5 cm. C160 per OZ.), broad oval, 
somewhat sub-reniform, fairly plump altho somewhat flat; ends 
rounded, occasionally truncate. Hilum small, and somewhat 
protuberant. Color dull white over entire surface. 

Currie Wax. Refs. 1, 35, 41, 46, 47, 48, 49, 53, 
67, 68, 84, 91. Syns. Admiral Togo, California Black 
Wax, Celestial Wax, Eldorado, Norfolk Wax, and Pod 
Spot Proof. This widely known variety is said to be a 
" sport " of Golden Wax, found in 1885 by Pagenkoff 
Bros, in a field of that variety near Milwaukee, Wis- 
consin. After its introduction by Currie Bros, in 1889 it 
became a very popular variety and was listed by about a 
hundred seedsmen in 1901, and by nearly 150 in 1921. 
Many selections have been made to improve this variety 
and have been given different varietal names, but in gen- 
eral they differ but slightly from the parent. Early in 
season, from 47 to 49 days to first pods. This variety is 
equal to Davis Wax or Golden Wax, but Challenge is 
2 days earlier and Brittle Wax 5 days later. Currie 
differs from Davis Wax in color of seed and flower, in 
smaller plant and leaves, and in pods shorter and less 
uniform. The pods are longer and thicker than Golden 
Wax, but shorter and with much more parchment than 
Sure Crop Wax. The color of seed and flowers is similar 
to Sure Crop, but the plants of Sure Crop are larger and 
more open, with leaves larger and lighter in color. 
Admiral Togo has shorter, rounder, and more curved 
pods than Currie. Baltimore Stringless yields better, 
has exceptionally long pods, and is stringless until pods 
get quite large. Best of All Stringless has darker foliage, 
pods more curved and rounder, is stringless until almost 
past edible stage, and has smaller seeds. Celestial 
Wax (said to be a selection from the California Black 
Wax strain) is earlier, with shorter, broader pods and 
smaller seeds. Early Harvest Wax is decidedly early 
and the pods are slightly larger and of better color. New 
Stringless Wax is later and has longer, much less stringy 
pods. Norfolk Wax is very early and productive. 
Perfection Wax is productive, but turns yellow very 
slowly. Pod Spot Proof is very much like New String 
less, but not better than Currie in disease-resistance. 

Plant strictly dwarf, medium in size, 12 to 14 inches high 
with spread of about 15 inches. Erect, compact, vigor only 
moderate, quite susceptible to disease, productive but bearing 
period short. Stems stout, round, smooth with slight ridging, 
internodes long; branches few, long, somewhat slender, occasionally 
spreading but holding pods well, frequently slight purple shading 
on branches and flower stalks, more noticeable at nodes. Foliage 
scanty to medium in amount, medium to light green, dull, smooth 
to slightly rough, very thin; leaflets medium about 4x3, broadest 
very near base, rounded, with comparatively short but sharp tips. 
Flowers phlox purple. 

Pods borne intermediate to below the foliage; light waxy 
yellow in color. Quality poor to medium; fairly brittle, stringy, 
some fiber, and coarse in texture. Size long, quite broad and 
plump < 5 1 ->-6 ' -i x Tt~TS x Yt inches), containing 5-6 seeds per 
pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross section, straight, straight- 
backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge 
and tapering at the end. Spur long, medium stout and nearly 
straight. Suture, placental is rounded and carpellary, moderately 
obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.5 x .7 x .6 cm. (65-75 per oz.); oblong, 



58 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



sub-reniform. plump; ends round, but occasionally truncate. Hilum 
small, flat. Color jet black, covered with a rather heavy bloom of 
bluish-black hue, in contrast to the dull solid black bloom of Ger- 
man Wax. 

Date Wax. Refs. 10, 15, 16, 45, 47, 61, 67, 68, 
79, 80, 84. A German variety introduced by Gregory 
as early as 1881, listed by Thorburn in 1886, and grown 
at Geneva in 1889. It was cultivated in this country 
until the end of the last century at least, through never 
as popular as in France, and particularly in Germany, 
whose seedsmen still list it. It is of the Flageolet Wax 
or Perfection Wax type, but the seeds are dun colored 
or yellowish brown, with deep brown eye-ring, large, 
very broad for their length, almost rectangular in out- 
line, decidedly flattened. Irish says identical with 
Long Yellow Six Weeks, but with yellow pods. Denaiffe 
says pods turned yellow very slowly. 

Davis Wax. Refs. 28, 36, 41, 47, 48, 49, 77, 91. 
Syns. Elgin White Wax, Improved Davis White Wax, 
Prolific Everbearing Wax, Tait's White Wax, Ventura 
Wonder Wax. This bean originated with Eugene Davis, 
Grand Rapids, Mich., and was introduced in 1895, by 
Ferry, Maule, and others, and by Burpee the following 
year. Rice, in 1931, introduced a new strain purporting 
to be stringless. Davis Wax, though of rather poor 
quality for home garden use, nevertheless has been one 
of the most widely grown sorts. Over 70 listings in 
leading catalogs were found in 1931. This great demand 
has been due to earliness and the beauty of the pods 
which are long, straight, uniform, and of an attractive 
light yellow color. If the new stringless strain holds up as 
such this variety should again become a leading sort. 
It is essentially a market garden variety to be grown for 
shipment to distant markets. It is early, 48 days 
at Geneva, a few days later than Challenge Wax, in 
season with Curries or Sure Crop, and a few days earlier 
than Refugee Wax or Pencil Pod. Since this is one of our 
oldest varieties and one that has been a leading sort for 
nearly 40 years, it is to be expected that the variety 
would be offered under several names. During the many 
years of testing all strains have proved to be essentially 
identical; though Prolific Everbearing Wax gave rather 
taller plants, with very coarse foliage, darker in color, 
pods slightly longer, and seeds perhaps a little smaller. 
Improved Davis White Wax was somewhat earlier, 
with smaller plants and foliage, and rather smaller, 
more uniform, plumper pods, but by no means stringless 
as claimed. Davis Wax, except in color of seed, is most 
like Currie Wax, the plant is larger, and the branches 
green throughout, whereas the plants of Currie have a 
purple tinge at the nodes, and the pods are longer and 
flatter. 

Plant small to medium, 10 to 14 inches high with spread of 
12 to 14 inches; stocky, erect, compact, runnerless but with a few 
flower spikes showing above foliage; vigor fair to good, moderately 
productive with short bearing period. Stems stout, round, ridged, 
short internodes; branches few, wholly green. Foliage medium 
to abundant, medium green, darker in some strains, almost glossy, 
but rough and somewhat crumpled, medium thickness; leaflets 3 s 4 
inches long, 2-2 3 4 inches wide, widest about one-third from base, 
quite generally rounded to stem, slightly curving with taper to 
rather short full tip. Flowers white. 



Pods borne intermediate; light to medium dull yellow in 
color. Quality poor; tough, very stringy and fibrous, not very 
meaty and rather coarse in texture. Size medium to long, broad 
and medium thin (5-6 x '-jx^ inchesl, containing 6-7 seeds per 
pod. Shape flat, ovate in cross-section, straight, straightbacked, 
regular, rather crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and 
rounded at the end. Spur long, stiff, thick, straight and quite 
green in color. Suture, placental is rounded and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.6 x .7 X .6 cm. 165-75 per oz.), 
reniform, plump; well rounded ends. Hilum small, protuberant. 
Color chalky white, thru which shows grayish vein-like markings 
over entire surface; marked with indistinct, yellowish, narrow 
eye-ring. 

Delicious. There were two varieties with this name, 
the earlier one having been introduced by Isbell in 
1912. It was similar in habit to Brittle Wax with per- 
fectly round, fleshy pods similar to those of Pencil Pod 
but with pure white seed with yellowish brown eye- 
ring. In 1917, due to crop failure, the planting stock 
was lost and the variety discontinued. 

The second wax bean to bear the name Delicious 
was introduced in 1928 by Landreth and is a variety 
seemingly with considerable merit. It originated as a 
sport of Burpee's Stringless Green Pod and was selected 
in 1922 by the Superintendent at their Filer, Idaho, 
growing station. Careful selection has fixed the type. 
It was listed by three seedsmen in 1931. Probable 
use is similar to that of Improved Golden Wax, a home 
garden variety of good quality. Season, 50 days, in 
season with Golden Wax, 2 or 3 days later than Currie 
Wax and Sure Crop. While the plant is noticeable for 
the small foliage, it is very unlike Refugee in plant char- 
acters. The pods are round to oval but much shorter 
than other round pod sorts, being somewhat between 
Golden Wax and Currie Wax in length. The seed is 
similar in shape and color to Burpee Stringless Green 
Pod. 

Plant medium, 14 to 16 inches tall with spread of 14 inches; 
erect, compact, runnerless; vigor good with yield moderate, bearing 
period only medium. Stem stout, branches few and green thruout. 
Foliage medium to abundant, dark green, with surface rough, 
crumpled, dull, thick; leaflets rather small, widest at midpoint, 
quite rounded. Flowers lilac. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light, medium 
dull yellow in color. Quality good; stringless, almost fiberless, 
brittle and fairly fine in texture. Size medium long, broad, 
and quite plump 4 ] 2 — 5 ' 2 " ''s^'-i * 3 s inches) containing 4—5 
seeds per pod. Shape round, oval in cross-section, straight to 
somewhat curved, creasebacked, regular to somewhat constricted, 
not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and rounded at 
the end. Spur long, medium thick and slightly curved. Suture, 
placental is slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.5 x .8 x .6 cm. (67-70 per oz.), oblong oval, 
plump to somewhat flattened, ends quite uniformly rounded. 
Hilum small, slightly protuberant. Color dark auburn brown 
1 mars brown to chestnut brown) over the entire surface blending 
into a darker shade on the hilar surface; marked with a narrow dark 
brownish black eye-ring. 

Detroit Wax. Refs. 14, 16, 41, 47, 48, 49, 67, 
68, 84, 85, 91, 96. Ferry introduced Detroit Wax in 
1885, probably as a selection from Golden Wax. It was 
quite popular for a time, having been listed by about 
40 seedsmen in 1901. 

Plants practically identical with those of Golden Wax, but 
in our tests distinctly shorter and branching very low; foliage 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



59 



rather scanty, with small broad leaflets, medium green, dull, rough, 
thick. Flowers white. Pods 4 to 4 3 4 inches long, nearly 3 ± inch 
wide, cross-section ovate with acute ventral edge, straight, only 
slightly constricted between beans, ends rounded to almost blunt, 
with short, heavy, rigid curved tip from dorsal edge, not very 
fleshy, stringy, quite fibrous, coarse-textured, of fair quality only, 
yellow, which appears rather slowly and often remains with green 
shade. Seeds 5, 65 to the ounce, about {$ inch long, rarely ' & inch, 
two-thirds as wide, broad oval or oblong, very plump but not round 
in cross-section. Color white, mottled irregularly about the hilum 
and one end with bluish black and maize yellow. 

Disjoin. Refs. 47. A variety that appears to have 
been grown in this country only in the tests at the 
Missouri Botanical Garden; but which was widely 
grown in France, where it originated and was introduced 
about 1895, probably as a selection from Barbes. Irish 
says it was like Hundredfold, but the seeds were larger 
and lighter in color. It differs from the parent variety, 
Barbes, mainly in pod color. 

Pods thick, fleshy, free from string and fiber until seeds 
enlarge, of beautiful golden yellow color. Seeds very broad oblong, 
with abruptly rounded ends, and very thick, in form intermediate 
between ovoid and thick kidney-shaped, chamois color tinted 
salmon, with darker eye-ring. 

Double Barrel. Refs. 48, 64, 91. Landreth in 
1901 was the first to list this variety, but it evidently 
originated prior to 1892, when a promise was made of 
sale " after harvest of 1892." 

Plant very much like Maule Butter in habit, but dwarfness, 
denseness of bush and foliage characters are less marked. Pods 
are smaller, straighter, and less noticeably " double-barreled." 
Seeds are narrower, thinner, much more sharply rounded at the end 
and of a uniform brownish ochre color with darker eye-ring. 

Dwarf Butter. Refs. 48. A European variety 
but little grown in America, and now apparently 
unknown anywhere. 

It was noticeable for its very small, compact plants with 
very dark foliage. Small podded. The seeds were short, broad, 
thick, and so crowded in the pods that the ends were markedly 
truncate, giving an almost quadrangular shape to the seeds as 
viewed from the side. They were light brown in color, with a 
yellowish tint. 

Dwarf Indian Chief. This is a dwarf form of 
Algiers or Indian Chief pole bean and one of the oldest 
wax beans; known in the United States since about 1867. 
Like most of the black-seeded wax pod beans it has been 
much confused with other varieties but as with the tall 
form, it is readily separated from most others by its 
plump ovoid seeds. Grown at Geneva in 1883, it 
combined earliness, yield, and quality as did almost no 
other variety of its time. 

Plant 1 to 1 ! 3 feet tall, slender stemmed but upright, runner- 
less, moderately vigorous, much branched; foliage medium in 
amount, varying in color on same plant. Flowers lilac. Pods 
4'-> - 4 3 4 inches long, slightly curved, rather short tipped, fleshy, 
thicker than wide, stringless and fiberless, butter yellow, marked 
purplish before yellowing; seeds 5, rather more than } •_> inch long, 
very broad oval, or ovoid, plump, black. 

Dwarf Mont D'Or. Refs. 10, 15, 27, 45, 47, 53, 
63, 66, 79, 84, 93, 94, 97, 98. This bean is probably of 
French origin, a dwarf selection from the pole bean 
similarly named. It is one of the most widely spread and 
most popular wax-pod varieties of France, but in other 
countries the strictly black-seeded sorts like Dwarf 



Indian Chief and German Black Wax seem to be pre- 
ferred. It was probably first grown in this country in 
tests at this Station in 1882, but was soon introduced 
commercially coming from Germany rather than from 
its home country. 

Plants about 1 foot tall, erect, runnerless; foliage abundant, 
light green, rough but not wrinkled, slightly curled, quite thick; 
leaflets small, }'i to 2 inches long, 1 to 2 inches wide, varying 
in shape of terminals from slender and sharply taperpointed to 
almost round with obtuse tips. Flowers pink or purplish. Pods 
3} 2 to 4^2 inches long, almost straight or slightly curved, with 
long rounded or pointed ends and stout, straight tips of medium 
length, from ?g to Js > ncn long, aJmost round, somewhat swollen 
by beans but not noticeably constricted, fleshy, stringless, fiber- 
less, tender, of good quality, pale cream to light yellow, some- 
times slightly flecked with purple. Seeds 4 or 5, very similar to 
those of Dwarf Indian Chief but smaller, and with abruptly 
curved ends on side view, distinctly broad, oval when viewed 
edgewise, with sharply rounded ends, dark reddish purple or rus- 
seted violet, when old almost black but old seeds when soaked in 
water clearly show the russeted appearance, while those of Indian 
Chief become clear violet. 

Dwarf Sugar Wax. Refs. 47. Apparently known 
in America only through distribution of seeds by the 
United States Department of Agriculture, and may be 
either one of two German varieties. 

As described by Denaiffe: Plant 1 ' f, feet tall, with many 
long runnerlike branches; pods 5 inches long, curved, yellowish, 
fleshy, stringless; beans small, like small flat marrows; rather late 
and yield too small to allow recommendation. The other strain 
is slightly taller, with smaller pods, very slow in yellowing; and 
with larger, more oval beans. 

Early Stringless Wax. A variety which originated 
with Olds, prior to 1913, when it was first listed by him. 
It is said to be a cross between Burpee Stringless Green 
Pod and Valentine Wax. As grown here in recent tests 
it falls only slightly short in productivity of Old's and 
Allan's commendations, and seems an excellent market 
bean of good quality and handsome appearance, although 
the pods turn yellow slowly and curve somewhat too 
much in later stages. 

Plant tall, l'g to l'f feet tall, very erect, with very rigid 
stems and comparatively few branches. Foliage medium in amount, 
dark green, slightly glossy, smooth. Leaflets 43 2 t>y 3 ] 4 inches, 
laterals, as large or larger than terminals, broadest slightly below 
center, rounded, with short, rather abrupt tips. Flowers white, 
cream or very lightly blushed. Pods 5 ] 4 to 5 3 4 inches long, 
straight or slightly curved, early, decidedly curved later, regular 
or later somewhat constricted, with rounded ends and long, 
moderately heavy, flexible tips from dorsal edges, less than ' 2 inch 
wide, round oval in cross-section, but markedly cordate because of 
deep creaseback, brittle, tender, not especially thick -fleshed, 
stringless, fiberless, almost fine-textured, light waxy yellow appear- 
ing slowly. Seeds about 5, about 70 to 75 to the ounce, nearly 
5 s inch long, half as wide, decidedly flattened, oblong, with abruptly 
rounded ends, or slightly kidney shaped, yellowish brown in color, 
perhaps best described as yellow lake or old gold. 

Everlasting. Refs. 45. Grown at Geneva in 1889 
and found to be an early mid-season dwarf snap bean, 
short-podded, with long seeds, brown, spotted with 
dark red. 

Extra Early Wax. A variety which originated with 
Tait, prior to 1912, seems to have been listed only by 
that firm, and dropped by them in 1924. It was grown 
here for three seasons and appeared to deserve its title, 
but was only fairly productive, flat -podded, and stringy. 



60 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant about same size as Refugee Wax, but with stouter 
stem and more rigid branches, bearing foliage very similar in shape 
and size to that of Refugee tho slightly longer and distinctly broader. 
Pods 4} 4 to 5 inches long, straight or very slightly curved, round- 
ended with long, straight, rigid tips, ' •_> inch broad, quite evenly 
oval in cross-section, stringy, somewhat fibrous and coarse in tex- 
ture, of only fair quality, dull light yellow. Seeds 5, about 55 to 
the ounce, quite variant in shape and color, but in general larger 
and darker than Hardy Wax, brown mottled with cinnamon, 
broader and plumper, occasionally as long, but usually shorter. 

Fillbasket Wax. Refs. 50, 86. This name has also 
been applied to a dwarf green pod and a tall wax bean. 
With three forms bearing a similar name there has been 
difficulty in establishing the extent of the distribution 
of Fillbasket Wax. The Michigan Station reports a 
trial in 1899 and describes the variety as having round, 
fleshy pods. All of the " Fillbaskets " had their origin 
in Germany. 

Fisher Stringless Golden. A variety developed by 
F. S. Fisher from bush plants found among those of 
Powell Giant Pole, and introduced by Vick in 1913. 
After about 5 years it was dropped as it did not attain 
popular fancy. 

Plant bush type, extraordinarily vigorous, productive and 
healthy, but late in bearing; pods 6 to 6 1 •> inches long, nearly J-i 
inch wide, ovate in cross-section, straight, with short necks, rounded 
ends, with short, heavy, straight tips from dorsal edges, " hooked " 
at ends; golden yellow, fairly thick-walled, tender, stringless, of fine 
flavor. Seeds 5, white, large, very broad oval, flattened, fairly 
plump, of excellent cooking quality when dry. 

Flageolet Wax. Refs. 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 29, 41, 

45, 47, 48, 49, 66, 67, 68, 84, 85, 91, 97, 98. Syns. 
Giant Red Wax, King of Wax, Midsummer Long Pod 
Wax, Perfection Wax, Red German, Rennie d'Or, 
Rennie's Stringless Wax, Simmer's Early Giant Wax. 
This once popular variety reached America about 1875 
from Germany. As originally introduced, it was made 
up of two distinct strains differing in color of seed. 
The variation in the seed color consisted of different 
shades of brownish red, crimson red, purplish red, or 
violet. In this country strains have been separated on 
the basis of seed color, the dark called Purple Flageolet 
and the light called Violet, Scarlet, or Crimson Flageolet. 
There is also one type known as Perfection Wax which 
is reputed to have originated by crossing Scarlet Flageo- 
let and Purple Flageolet, seed of this cross appearing 
with more brown coloring. Burpee introduced Per- 
fection Wax in 1887. This later became known as 
Violet Flageolet and Purple Flageolet Wax. The 
Landreth Seed Co., in 1887, introduced Landreth's 
Scarlet Wax, which later became known as Crimson 
Flageolet Wax, Red Flageolet Wax and Scarlet Flageolet 
Wax. The credit for originating both of the above 
introductions is given to A. H. Ansley 8s Son, Milo 
Center, N. Y. All of these strains have been mixed 
and reseparated many times. Thirty years ago it was 
a rather popular sort, being listed in 1901 by about 
120 seedsmen. Their popularity has steadily declined 
so that in 1921 there were 30 listings and only 1 in 1931. 
The pods are ready in 51 days, or 5 days later than the 
earliest wax sorts, similar in season to Pencil Pod and 
Brittle Wax. The variety closely resembles Davis 



Wax with the chief difference being in the color of seed 
and larger pods. The shape of the pod is somewhat 
similar to pods of Canadian Wonder. 

Plant medium to large, 14 to 17 inches high with spread of 
14 inches, erect, tree like, compact; without runners, vigor good, 
yield moderate, bearing season tends to be rather short. Stem 
stout, very rigid, round, smooth, ridged above, internodes long, 
branches strong, stiff, occasionally slight purplish shading near 
nodes. Foliage abundant, medium green or lighter, dull, rough 
surfaced, coarse, crumpled, slight pubescence, heavy veined, thick; 
leaflets above medium in size 4 to 4'a inches long by 3 to 3,'^ 
inches wide at one-fourth or one-third the distance from base, 
midvein of side leaflets divides the area unequally, almost straight 
to rather short tips. Flowers phlox pink. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; deep waxy 
yellow in color. Quality poor; tough, stringy, fibrous, and rather 
coarse in texture. Size long, broad and medium slender to plump 
(6-7 x J/2 x tV inches), containing 6-7 seeds per pod. Shape flat, 
oval in cross-section, slightly curved, straight backed, regular, 
not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and pointed at the 
end. Spur long, slender and nearly straight. Suture, placental is 
flattened and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds large 1.6 x .8 x .6 cm. (55 per oz.); oblong, sub-reniform, 
fairly plump to somewhat flattened; ends rounded and occasionally 
somewhat truncate. Hilum small, flattened. Color varying shades 
of deep bluish black to maroon with a purplish tinge (indian 
purple). 

German Blaek Wax. Refs. 9, 10, 30, 41, 44, 48, 

49, 60, 63, 66, 79, 91, 96, 97, 98. Syns. Earliest of 
All Wax, Fuller's Black Wax, Fuller's Ringlead Black 
Wax, Saddle Back Wax. This variety is one of our 
oldest known dwarf wax beans. Whether it preceded 
Dwarf Indian Chief is unknown, but it was listed in 
America somewhat earlier, about 1865. Interlocking 
synonyms and the advent of improved strains of black 
wax beans of this type make it impossible to separate 
the listings of German Black Wax from the many 
selections and renamed sorts that came along during 
the next 40 years. It was very popular during the last 
quarter of the past century, 150 seedsmen listing Black 
Wax (which was undoubtedly in great part the German 
variety) and German Black Wax in 1901, but less than 
one-third as many 20 years later and only 3 in 1931. 
As with Currie Wax, several rather distinct strains arose. 
Saddle-back Wax raised by Keeney and introduced 
about 1889 by Landreth, Burpee and others, had pods 
thicker than wide, very fleshy, much curved, with longer 
tips, and large, plump seeds. Seed of German Black 
Wax was often substituted for Saddle-back and the two 
were usually considered identical, but apparently pure 
seed still produces strains easily separable. Fuller 
Black Wax had rather longer pods, darker yellow, and 
rather less stringy. Earliest of All Wax was developed 
in Northern Michigan for earliness and supposedly 
rust -resistance, neither of which was apparent in recent 
tests here. While the yield was very good, the pods 
were not quite as round as those of other types, and were 
often distinctly purplish, stringless, and of fine quality, 
with the seeds crowded in the pods and often truncate. 
Shipper Wax is a long podded Saddle-back Wax, with 
much taller plants, very long, very thick, much curved 
pods. At Geneva pods were ready to pick in 50 days, a 
second early similar in season to Prolific Black Wax and 
Pencil Pod, 3 to 5 days later than Challenge Black Wax. 







VIOLET FLAGEOLET WAX 



II 



t 






BURPEE'S BRITTLE WAX 







• ft 



PENCIL POD BLACK WAX 




; 



WARDWELL'S KIDNEY WAX 



I ' 



DWARF WAX PODS 



Natural size) 





DAVIS WAX 





II 



SURE CROP STRINGLESS WAX 



EXTRA EARLY WAX 





J 

HODSON SILVER WAX >^ ^^ 



DWARF WAX PODS 



("Natural sizel 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



61 



Plant small, 1 foot tall or less, spread of 10 to 12 inches; 
erect and compact without runners, vigor only fair, moderate in 
yield and length of bearing period. Stems of medium strength, 
smooth ridged slightly above, branches rather few, spreading with 
weight of pods, generally slightly tinged with purple in places on 
branches and flower stalks. Foliage medium to abundant, medium 
green, slightly crumpled, thin; leaflets rather long, 5 by 3' _> inches, 
broadest one-third the distance from base, distinctly rounded, then 
slightly curved to moderately sharp tips. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods borne below foliage; medium yellow in color. Quality 
very good; very brittle, stringless, fiberless and moderately fine in 
texture. Size medium long, rather narrow and slender (4 ' _>-5 
x l -2 x "'s -1 .' inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, 
nearly circular to very broad oval in cross-section, curved to 
Scimitar shaped in some strains, straight to creasebacked, regular, 
filled to the tip and edge, smooth, not crowded and decidedly 
pointed at the end. Spur moderately long, rather slender and 
straight. Suture, placental is slightly indented to somewhat 
flattened and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds small to medium, 1.35 x .65 x .6 cm. (75-100 per oz.), 
quite variable in this respect; somewhat cylindrical, sub-reniform, 
plump; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. Hilum small and flat, 
with a tendency for a portion of the placental suture to adhere to 
it. Color jet black, covered with a rather heavy bloom, but when 
removed, a glossy shining black is produced. 

Golden Age. Syns. Jubilee Wax. There have 
been few new varieties of merit offered during the last 
20 years, but Golden Age, introduced by Henderson 
in 1922, is a promising sort. As noted under the 
green-podded variety, Tendergreen, this firm did 
some hybridization work 20 years ago which resulted 
in the introduction of three new varieties, viz., the 
Henderson in 1920, and Tendergreen in 1922, both 
greenpods, and the wax-podded variety Golden Age 
in 1922. These three new varieties bear certain resem- 
blances ; all are classed as round pods with large vigorous 
plants, bearing pods which are stringless and of good 
quality. The seeds of all three are mottled, and more- 
over those of Henderson (greenpod) are practically 
identical with those of Golden Age (waxpod) . It would 
appear that the same parents were used to secure these 
new and excellent sorts. Although this bean is 10 
years old, it has not been widely grown, being offered 
in 1931 by only one seedsman other than the introducer 
and then under the name Jubilee Wax. The pods are 
ready in from 51 to 52 days at Geneva, in season with 
Refugee Wax, Golden Wax, and Pencil Pod. The pods 
have rather a better color than Refugee Wax, are slender, 
more like those of Pencil Pod, fully round, very waxy. 
The seed may be called intermediate between Hardy 
Wax and Valentine Wax or between Full Measure and 
Longfellow. The leaflets are of Pencil Pod shape and 
size, but not as thick, less crumpled, and more pointed. 

Plant 14 inches tall and with spread of from 14 to 16 inches 
in row; erect, compact, runnerless; vigor good, yield above medium. 
Stem stout, rigid, base short, smooth, ridged above, internodes short, 
branching low giving squatty appearance but holding branches 
erect with pods free from ground, green throughout. Foliage 
abundant, somewhat coarse, slightly darker than medium green, 
not glossy, rough, very finely crumpled, very thick; leaflets 4 to 
4> 4 inches long, 2? 4 to 3.' 4 inches wide, somewhat below middle 
with straight margins, terminals quite square, side leaflets more one 
sided, rounded to base, short taper-pointed tips. Flowers pink 
blush. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; deep waxy color. 
Quality very good; brittle, tender, stringless, fiberless and fine in 



texture. Size medium to long, rather narrow and slender ( 5 ■ £- 
6 x s s x '3 inches 1, containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, 
nearly circular, altho somewhat cordate in cross-section, moderately 
curved, slightly creasebacked, regular, quite crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip and edge and pointed at the end. Spur long, slender 
and straight, somewhat flexible. Suture, placental is slightly 
indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.6 x .7 x .6 cm. (85-90 per oz.); 
nearly cylindrical, occasionally sub-reniform, plump; ends rounded. 
Hilum small, flattened to slightly indented. Color dark buff 
(vinaceous-cinnamon) under color and almost entirely covered 
with reddish brown (burnt sienna) mottling. 

Golden Beauty. Refs. 48, 49, 91. This variety 
was introduced about 1890 by Pearce, London, Canada. 
It was of Golden Wax type, especially in foliage, but 
entirely distinct, apparently more hardy and productive. 

Plant usually under one foot, stiff-stemmed, erect, compact; 
foliage grayish green, very smooth surfaced; leaflets very wide, 
flat. Flowers white. Pods quite characteristic, somewhat like 
Double-barrel, more stocky, but less creasebacked, 4 ] 2 to 5 inches 
long, slightly curved at tip and less curved, reversely, at neck with 
pointed ends changing gradually to stout tips of medium length, 
} 2 inch in width, oval approaching round in cross-section, constricted 
between beans, which enlarge early and show plainly, fleshy, brittle, 
tender, stringless and fiberless, fair to good in quality, seeds 4 to 
6, deep yellow, about -j^ inch long, nearly three-quarters as wide 
and half as thick, very broad oval with widely rounded ends, 
broadly ovate in edgewise view, brownish ochre with very narrow, 
darker eye-ring. 

Golden Butter Wax. Refs. 16, 61. This variety 
was grown at this Station in 1882 and in 1883 was con- 
sidered the same as Dwarf Indian Chief, but comparative 
growth data prove the two quite distinct. It has been 
impossible to connect the variety with any other Golden 
Butter beans. The pods are small, averaging about 
three seeds only. The pale yellow, almost translucent 
appearance of the pods and the slender, kidney shape of 
the beans are the most noticeable characteristics. The 
seeds are black. 

Golden Crown. Refs. 41, 48, 91. A variety, now 
obsolete, which originated with A. N. Jones, LeRoy, 
N. Y., from a Yosemite Wax x Ivory Pod Wax cross, 
and introduced by him in 1899. Tracy considered 
this better than its older half-sister, Jones Stringless, 
in having straighter and larger pods, somewhat more 
productive, and more uniform. It was much like Ger- 
man Black Wax, but white-seeded and with straighter, 
better-filled pods. 

Plant of medium size, erect but drooping with weight of 
pods, thick-stemmed, runnerless, early, moderately productive over 
season of moderate length, leaflets of medium size, green. Flowers 
white. Pods 4J2 to 5 inches long, quite uniform, somewhat curved; 
round, yellow, very brittle, stringless, fiberless and of excellent 
quality. Seeds 6, crowded in pod, rather more than ' 2 inch long, 
about x s inch wide, and nearly as thick, broad-oblong with short- 
rounded, frequently truncate ends, white with marked yellow 
eye-ring. 

Golden Eyed Wax. Refs. 9, 14, 28, 29, 41, 45, 

48, 49, 57, 59, 84, 85, 91, 92, 95. Syn. Sunshine 
Bush Wax. Credit for originating this variety has been 
given to W. J. Bartlett, Oshawa, Canada. It was 
introduced first in New England, Rawson in 1888 and 
Low in 1899 offering the seed as an improved new wax 
bean. Details are lacking as to the parentage or variety 
from which Golden Eye Wax was selected. It is still 



62 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



grown in some sections but was offered by only three 
seedsmen in 1931. A second early, ready in 50 days, 
in season with Golden Wax. It is quite similar to the 
old variety known as Allan's Imperial Wax, with seed 
resembling the molasses face type of Yellow Eye field 
bean. Few wax varieties show as much green in pod 
color. 

Plant about 1 to 1 '4 feet tall, with moderately stout, rigid 
stem and erect branches; runnerless; vigor fair, moderately pro- 
ductive over short bearing period. Foliage abundant, light to 
medium green, dull, slightly rough, not crumpled, mediu-n to heavy 
veined, thick; leaflets 4 ! _> inches long by 2 3 , inches wide, long and 
slender, on much twisted pedicels, frequently reversed showing 
lighter backs, tips long, slender. Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light, moderately 
waxy yellow in color. Quality poor, stringy, fibrous, tough and 
coarse in texture. Size moderately long, broad and slender 4 ] _■- 
5 ■ _■ x ' < x .-'4 inches' containing 5 seeds per pod. Shape flat, 
long ovate thru cross-section, straight to slightly curved, straight 
backed, regular, moderately crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and 
the edge and rounded at the end. Spur moderately long, slender 
and straight. Suture, placental is rounded and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium large, 1.35 x .75 x .55 cm., containing 75-80 
per oz. Shape medium long broad oval, flattened, occasionally 
fairly plump, elliptical thru cross-section, ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum medium large and flat; color dull white, quite distinctly 
marked with a vein-like net work over 90 r J of the surface, with 
irregular, tawny yellow (Mars yellow to Raw Sienna* blotches; 
spots and occasionally a solid area similar to molasses face Yellow 
Eye on the hilar surface and the ventral portion of one or both ends. 
An eye-ring that is narrow and reddish-brown (cameo brown) in 
color is usually apparent. 

Golden Prize. Refs. 90. Except for periodical 
references in 1886 and 1887, this variety is practically 
unknown, although it was listed by one seedsman in 
1901. Supposedly a sport from Yellow-eye with golden 
yellow pods. 

Golden Wax. Refs. 14, 16, 25, 27, 29, 35, 41, 47, 
48, 49, 50, 58, 59, 61, 63, 66, 68, 69. 80, 81, 87. 91. 
95. 99. Syns. Cream Wax, Dwarf Golden Wax, 
Early Golden Wax, Golden Butter, Isbell's New Golden 
Butter Wax, Pink-eyed Wax, York Dwarf Wax, York 
State Wax. The name Golden Wax represents a dis- 
tinct group of wax beans, one of our oldest known 
cultivated types. Its origin or exact history is not 
known. In 1871, Gregory introduced York Dwarf Wax, 
the forerunner of and by some thought to be identical 
with the bean which Ferry introduced 5 years later as 
Golden Wax. The bean York Dwarf Wax was thought 
to have come from Marten's old bean, Phaseolus 
sphaericus dimidiatus. Whether York came directly 
from Germany, was found in America as brought 
over by immigrants, or whether the original type was 
American and went to Europe, is unknown. After the 
introduction of Golden Wax by Ferry, York Dwarf 
Wax was soon dropped, but the type which it repre- 
sented became known as Golden Wax (old style 1. 
This form can still be secured, in fact was listed by 17 
seedsmen in 1931, although it is 60 years since it was 
introduced. An Improved Golden Wax has also been 
introduced as well as a variety known as Rustproof 
Golden Wax (Grenell). All differ in some degree 
perhaps more in plant characters than those of the pods. 
A survey of the catalogs issued in 1921 showed that 70 



seedsmen offered Golden Wax, 151 Improved Golden 
Wax, and 20 Rustproof Golden Wax. About the same 
ratio is maintained today. 

For the most part Golden Wax is used chiefly as a 
home garden bean, although it is in some demand as a 
canning bean. Probably the size of the pod is its chief 
detriment, since the vogue is rather for the long round 
podded sorts, such as Kidney Wax and Pencil Pod, or 
for the flat-podded types similar to Sure Crop. Early, 
48 to 50 days at Geneva, in season with Pencil Pod, but 
a few days later than Wardwell's Kidney Wax and 
Challenge Black Wax. 

Plant small, 10 to 14 inches high, 10 to 12 inches spread; 
erect, compact, stocky, without runners; vigor only fair, moderately 
productive over short bearing period. Stem very thick, stout, 
rigid, round, slightly ridged above, internodes short; branches few, 
no secondaries; wholly green. Foliage medium abundant, medium 
green in color, dull, rough surface but not crinkled or wrinkled, 
thick; leaflets about 3 ] > by 2 3 4 inches, broadest one-third distance 
from base, much rounded, sides slightly incurved to rather obtuse 
tips. Flowers white. 

Pods borne largely above foliage; medium light waxy yellow 
with a slight greenish tinge in color. Quality good, stringless, 
has some fiber, very brittle, but rather coarse in texture. Size 
medium long, narrow, and medium thick (5—5 ' 2 x J 2—^ >'- < 
inches' containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape oval to flat, ovate 
in cross-section, straight, straight-backed, regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and the edge, and rounded at the end. 
Spur short, thick and straight, altho at times slightly curved. 
Suture, placental is rounded to very slightly indented and carpellary, 
acute. 

Seeds small to medium 1.2 x .8 x .6 cm. (70-75 per oz.), short 
oval, nearly circular in cross-section, abruptly rounded ends. Hilum 
small, rounded to flat. Color dorsal surface and a portion of the 
ends and sides, white; hilar surface irregularly mottled and patterned 
with purplish maroon dull Indian purple) to (anthracene purple). 
In some instances a solid deep buff to brown irregular eye-ring is 
perceptible. 

Golden Wax (old style). Refs. 69. This was first 
known as York Dwarf Wax. The pods differ from those 
of Golden Wax by being somewhat marked with purple, 
broader, heavier, and with shorter tips. The seeds of 
" Old Style " beans are about one-eighth larger than 
those of Golden Wax with the darkened area quite 
uniformly distributed around the eye, without the 
tendency for marking to extend over the end of the seed 
nearer the neck of the pod, such as is found in seeds of 
Golden Wax. The borders of the dark areas are much 
more irregular in the older type and small spots and 
patches in the white are much more numerous. Plants 
of " Old Style " are smaller, averaging perhaps 2 inches 
shorter than either Golden Wax or Improved Golden 
Wax. 

Grenell Rust Proof Wax. Syns. Gold Wax 
Improved, Green's Golden German Wax, Golden Jersey 
Wax, Improved Golden Wax, Improved Rustproof 
Golden Wax. Grenell's Improved Golden Wax, Rust- 
proof Golden Wax. This strain originated with W. H. 
Grenell of Pierrepont Manor, N. Y., and was introduced 
in 1884. It was a selection from Golden Wax. Similar 
to Golden Wax. but perhaps because of the association 
of the names Improved and Rustproof this strain is 
more often offered than any other. Seeds rather larger, 
marked with varying shades of tan and brown with 








CHALLENGE BLACK WAX 



If 



' 





e* 



GRENELL'S IMPROVED KIDNEY POD GOLDEN WAX 




IMPROVED BLACK WAX 




DWARF WAX PODS 



(Natural size) 




EARLIEST MARKET WAX 



Natural size 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



63 



little or no purple. Pods, shorter, flatter, usually per- 
fectly straight with longer tips. The pods are often 
still quite green when in best edible condition but 
stronger yellow when past green stage. 

Griswold Everbearing. Refs. 80. This bean origi- 
nated with Thos. Griswold, Wethersfield, Conn., some 
time before 1890, and was introduced by Johnson and 
Stokes in 1890. After a brief reign of popularity it soon 
disappeared from listings. 

Plant erect, stiff-stemmed, much branched, vigorous, spread- 
ing, very productive, early and continued over a long season; pods 
6 to 7 inches long, somewhat curved, round, fleshy, wholly stringless, 
fine flavored, light waxy yellow; seeds of Mohawk or Full Measure 
type. 

Hardy Wax. Refs. 48, 91. This wax bean, a seem- 
ingly good and useful variety, originated with Keeney 
and was introduced by Livingston in 1906. Inasmuch 
as the color of the seed coat is unlike that of any other 
garden bean in cultivation today, it is quite probable 
that Hardy Wax is of hybrid origin and not a selection 
from any other sort. Its popularity has perhaps been 
influenced by the similarity of its pods to those of Pencil 
Pod. They are somewhat more slender with shorter tips 
and with a tendency toward more green in the yellow 
coloring. It is an early variety, at Geneva 48 days to 
edible pod, coming in just after Challenge and about 2 
days earlier than Pencil Pod or Sure Crop and perhaps 
4 days earlier than Brittle Wax. 

Plant medium to large, 14 to 16 inches high, 12 to 16 inches 
spread, rather erect, compact, without runners; vigor good, moder- 
ately productive with long bearing period. Stem stout, round, 
slightly ridged, branches few, rather long, being weighed down 
as pods enlarge but not enough to cause pods to rest on ground, 
wholly green. Foliage medium to abundant, rather coarse, rough- 
surfaced but not wrinkled, medium thick, leaflets large, about 
4 ' 2 by ^ J s inches, very broad from somewhat above base to near 
middle, round with short, blunt tips. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; medium light 
waxy yellow in color. Quality good to excellent, brittle, fleshy, 
stringless, quite fiberless and moderately fine in texture. Size 
long, rather narrow and quite plump ( 5 } ^ — 6 x 3 s x y 6 — 3 > inches), 
containing 5—6 seeds per pod. Shape round, nearly circular to 
cordate thru cross-section, much curved, occasionally scimitar- 
shaped, quite deeply creasebacked, slightly constricted, fairly well 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and pointed at the end. 
Spur long, slender and recurved. Suture, placental is indented and 
carpellary obtuse. 

Seeds medium in size, 1.45 x .5 x .55 cm., containing 70-75 
seeds per oz. Shape oblong, subreniform, occasionally somewhat 
boat shaped, broad oval thru cross-section; ends abruptly rounded 
and occasionally truncate. Hilum medium and flat having a ten- 
dency for a portion of the placental suture to adhere to it. Color 
varying shades of tobacco brown splashed and mottled with (vina- 
ceous-cinnamon over about half the surface. 

Hodson Wax. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. Everbearing 
Wax, Golden Queen, Hodson Long-podded Wax, Hod- 
son Silver Wax, Hodson Wax Rustproof. This variety 
was first offered to growers in 1902 by the Harvey Seed 
Company of Buffalo. The exact origin is unknown, 
although the 1906 catalog of Josiah Young of Troy, 
N. Y., says, "A grand early variety which originated near 
Buffalo." Because of its resemblance to Hodson 
Green Pod, it may have originated as a sport from a 
planting of that variety. Hodson Wax quickly became 



popular. It was listed by Henderson in 1906, by 
Thorburn in 1907, and by 1921 it was carried by over 
100 seedsmen. The pods of Hodson Wax are large 
and handsome, making a striking appearance for exhibi- 
tion. It is grown in the South for shipping, and also in 
parts of this State for shipment to the New York markets. 
The pods require 62 days to the first picking, making this 
the latest of our well-known varieties. It is about the 
same in season as Refugee, but 6 days later than Refugee 
Wax, and 12 days later than Pencil Pod or Sure Crop. 
In foliage characters the plants are most like Late 
Refugee, the pods resemble those of Davis Wax, but 
are larger and perhaps even tougher; and the seed is 
similar in color to seed of Red Valentine, but is larger 
and longer. 

Plant large, 15 to 20 inches high with spread of nearly two 
feet, rather sprawling in habit, without runners, extremely vigorous, 
hardy, very resistant to rust, long in bearing season, very heavily 
productive; stem moderately stout, fairly rigid, round to oval, 
ridged slightly; branches long, rather slender, widely spreading, 
drooping or trailing, sometimes runnerlike, green thruout. Foliage 
very abundant, dense, similar to that of Refugee varieties, but 
on a larger scale, dark green, dull, only slightly roughened, thin, 
almost lacking pubescence. Leaflets small, 4 to 4 ' _■ inches long, 
2 J s to 2 3 4 inches wide at one-third distance from base, margins 
straight or slightly outcurving toward stems and incurving toward 
long, slender, sharp tips. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne below the foliage, light waxy yellow in color. 
Quality poor to fair; rather tough, stringy, and of coarse texture. 
Size long, medium broad and slender (6-7>_> x > _. x fj inches), 
containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape fiat, ovate in cross-section, 
straight to slightly curved, straight backed, regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and tapering at the end. Spur 
long, slender, and straight or slightly curved. Suture, placental is 
flat to slightly indented, and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.5 x .7 x .6 cm. (65—70 per oz.), sub- 
reniform to somewhat cylindrical, plump to somewhat flattened; 
abruptly rounded, and rarely truncate ends. Hilum small, flat. 
Color reddish purple (garnet brown to ox-blood red' splashed with 
pale buff (pale pinkish buff) over entire surface. Quite similar 
to Red Valentine in this respect. 

Horticultural Wax. Refs. 47, 49. This is a 
variety without real merit that originated before 1896. 
It was introduced by Rawson as a Golden Wax x Dwarf 
Horticultural cross. It was highly praised at first but 
was not adopted by growers generally and soon dis- 
appeared. It was quite early, very productive, unusu- 
ally free from anthracnose, and had rich yellow, straight, 
oval pods of poor quality. 

Plant large, erect, vigorous, runnerless; foliage of medium 
size and color; flowers blushed. Pods about 5 ' ■• inches long, straight, 
with long-rounded ends and rather long, stout, straight, central 
tips, about ] 2 inch wide, broad-ovate in cross-section, rich yellow 
in color. Seeds about 6, crowded in pod, not quite J £ inch long, 
very broad oblong in shape or broad oval with truncate ends, 
?4 as wide as long, flattened, intermediate in color and patterning 
between seeds of Horticultural and Red Valentine types, purplish 
red in heavy patches showing small areas of pale buff. 

Ideal Wax. No trial record of this variety has 
been found. It supposedly originated with Keeney and 
was distributed only by him. It was hardy, very pro- 
ductive, late, with round, yellow, stringless pods of 
' fine quality; seeds white. 

Jones Stringless. Refs. 41, 48, 91. Syns. 
Imperial White Seeded Wax, Jones Stringless Round 



64 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Pod. This is the best of the varieties originated by 
A. N. Jones, LeRoy, N. Y., and was said to have origi- 
nated as the result of 5 years of systematic cross-breeding 
between Yosemite Wax and the white-seeded Crystal 
White Wax or Ivory Pod Wax. This variety, therefore, 
is a half-sister of Golden Crown introduced in 1899. 
Jones Stringless was introduced by several seedsmen in 
1898. Although bearing pods of good quality, this 
variety never became very popular. The last few 
seasons seed purchased as Jones Stringless gave plants 
and pods identical with the Improved Strain of Davis 
Wax. Early in season, the pods resemble those of 
German Black Wax, although they are smaller and a 
lighter yellow and pods at green shell stage do not show 
reddish tinge at stem end. The seed and flowers are 
white, a combination in the Wax Pods found only in 
Crystal Wax, Asgrow Wax, and Davis Wax. 

Plant medium, 12 to 14 inches tall, erect but spreading when 
pods mature, runnerless, green throughout, moderate in yield and 
bearing period. Foliage medium abundant, leaflets medium, dark 
green. Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light yellow in 
color. Quality good; fleshy, stringless, nearly fiberless, quite 
tender and moderately fine in texture. Size long, quite broad and 
rather slender (5j^-6 x • *' £ x \ inches), containing 5-6 seeds per 
pod. Shape flat, ovate in cross-section, straight, straight backed, 
regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and 
moderately rounded at the end. Spur long, slender and straight. 
Suture, placental is flat to somewhat rounded and carpellary, dis- 
tinctly acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.45 x .65 x .6 cm. (75-80 per oz.); moderately 
plump, reniform, oval in cross-section; ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum medium, protuberant. Color dull white over entire surface, 
quite distinctly marked with gray vein-like underpattern and a very 
pale yellow, narrow eye-ring. 

Keeney Rustless Golden Wax. Refs. 41, 47, 48, 
49, 87, 91. Syns. Farquhar's Rustless Golden Wax. 
This member of the Golden Wax group departs con- 
siderably from the group type in character of plant. 
Burpee and others in 1895 made the original introduction 
to the trade, having secured seed from Keeney, the origi- 
nator. The pods and seeds are very similar to Golden 
Wax, but its habit of growth is distinct among garden 
beans. In some respects the foliage resembles the 
Refugee type of foliage. It is possible that Rustless 
Golden Wax may be a natural hybrid between Refugee 
and Golden Wax. A comparison with Golden Wax 
shows foliage smaller and more slender. The leaves 
have a peculiar surface and easily turn in the wind and 
in growth, showing the underside which is grayish green 
in color. The pods are slightly longer, color more 
promptly, and become a deeper yellow and the seeds 
are larger with more purplish markings and with quite 
irregular outlines. Compared in season, it is 3 days 
later than the other Golden Wax varieties and 4 days 
later than Pencil Pod and Sure Crop. 

Plant, growth habit unusual among the dwarf beans, medium 
in size, 14 to 15 inches high with spread of 14 to 18 inches; com- 
pact, upright in spite of many long drooping, almost runnerlike 
branches, by some called side wheelers; these short runners are very 
noticeable when plants are young but less prominent later and never 
long enough to interfere with cultivation; vigor good, very hardy, 
quite resistant to anthracnose, productive, continuous bearer, the 
first pods are set quite early close to the center of the plant, later 



the plant puts forth short tendril-like runners on which pods are 
formed for late picking. Stem stout, tho rather flexible and long, 
round, ridged only slightly; branches slender, wholly green. Foliage 
abundant, dark green, dull, very flat, smooth surface, thin; leaflets 
3 ] 2 by 2 I 4, widest one-fourth the distance from base, straight 
sided, quite angular, long taper to sharp point. Flowers white. 

Pods borne both above and below the foliage; deep, waxy 
yellow in color. Quality good, brittle, stringless, nearly fiberless 
and moderately fine in texture. Size moderately long, broad and 



fairly slender ( 4 J -_»-5 } 2 x } ■ 



inches!, containing 5-6 



seeds per pod. Shape flat; oval thru cross-section, straight to 
slightly curved, straight backed, regular, moderately crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and fairly well rounded on the 
end. Spur short, moderately stout and straight, although occa- 
sionally recurved. Suture, placental fiat to somewhat rounded and 
carpellary, moderately acute. 

Seeds large, 1.3 x .8 x .75 cm. (50-60 per oz.); short oval, 
very plump; ends rounded. Hilum small, flat or very slightly 
protuberant. Color white, indicating grayish vein-like markings 
on the dorsal surface, and blotched on the hilar surface with irregular 
splashes of light purplish maroon (dull Indian purple 1 to 1 anthra- 
cene purple 1 and dark buff ivinaceous fawn) very similar to Golden 
Wax. A very dark buff eye-ring perceptible in most instances. 

Kidney Wax. Refs. 9, 48, 69, 87, 91, 99. Syns. 
Burpee's New Kidney Wax, Fairfield Wonder Wax, 
Faribault Kidney Wax, Improved Butter Wax, Improved 
Kidney Wax, New Baltimore Stringless Wax, and 
Stringless Kidney Wax. Black-eyed Wax and Ward- 
well Wax were the parents used by Keeney to produce 
Kidney Wax, first introduced by Burpee in 1906. This 
popular wax pod is widely grown and sold under many 
different variations of the names given as synonyms. 
Seeds of these vary in color pattern in a minor way, 
but differences in plants and pods are rather difficult 
to detect. Faribault Kidney Wax as originally obtained 
in 1923 had seed with more coloring and larger eye- 
markings, but more recent samples bear close resemblance 
to Kidney Wax. The pods of Kidney Wax appear 
longer than Brittle Wax pods, because they are straighter. 
They are not quite so flat nor as wide as pods of Ward- 
well's Kidney Wax, but are slightly longer, straighter, 
and handsomer in appearance. Kidney Wax is a 
variety suitable for the home garden, market garden, 
or to grow for the cannery. To be at its best, the deep 
wax-colored, semi-round, stringless pods must be picked 
in early stages to avoid some fiber in pod walls. The 
long straight pods of Kidney Wax give an even cut 
and minimum amount of seed development. In season 
it is a second early, ready in 49 to 50 days, in season 
with Wardwell's Kidney Wax, Golden Wax, and Brittle 
Wax. 

Plant similar in growth habit to plants of Brittle Wax, plant 
perhaps not quite as tall and growing slightly more erect. Pods 
borne both above and below foliage; medium to light yellow in color. 
Quality excellent; very brittle, stringless, nearly without fiber 
and of fine texture. Size short to medium, somewhat narrow, 
and plump 4 ' _. 5 \ _. x ,"',, ' £ x ■ i - ^ inches I, containing 4-6 seeds 
per pod. Shape round, broad oval, much curved to scimitar shape, 
creasebacked, constricted, crowded, smooth, filled to the tip, 
and rounded at the end. Spur flexible, slender, medium long, more 
often straight than recurved, altho occasionally the latter takes 
precedence in some strains. Suture, placental is slightly indented 
and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.5 X .7 x .6 cm. (72-80 per oz.), long, 
subreniform, plump, with abruptly rounded to truncate ends. 
Hilum small, flat to slightly protuberant. Color white, thru which 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



65 



may be seen grayish vein-like markings; patterned with shining 
black, broad, irregular eye-ring. 

King of the Wax. Refs. 87. Introduced the same 
year, 1896, to French growers by Vilmorin and to 
American gardeners by Dreer, King of the Wax had 
rather a short period of popularity, at least in this 
country. At the time of its introduction it was con- 
sidered a dual purpose bean, the dry seeds being as 
well adapted for cooking and baking as the pods were 
for snaps. 

Plants very much like those of Davis Wax, rather more stocky, 
very early, pods 4 3 4 to 5 1 _• inches long, ' £ inch wide, nearly round, 
strongly curved, very fleshy, swollen by beans, stringless and fiber- 
less, very tender and of fine quality; seeds 4 or 5, almost identical 
with those of Davis Wax, but slightly broader. 

Lemon Pod. Refs. 80, 81, 98. A variety grown 
for test at Geneva in 1883, in which year it was intro- 
duced by Everitt. It was said to be " almost identical 
with Ivory Pod Wax," under which name Crystal Wax 
was grown in 1882, but with pods quite distinctly 
yellow. 

Plant strong, upright, but with many runners 2jo to 3 feet 
long; foliage irregular in size and color; blossoms large. Pods 
broad, flat, wavy in outline, very wax-like, beautiful golden color, 
of best quality. Seeds white, variable in size and shape; late and 
less productive than Crystal Wax. 

Leopard Wax. Refs. 48, 91. The parent stock for 
this introduction, made in 1905 by S. F. Leonard, was 
found in 1904 by an Indiana grower. While the pods 
were of rather good quality, the variety was never 
generally accepted as possessing better than average 
merit. 

Plant very dwarf, under a foot tall, compact, dense until 
spread by weight of developing pods, runnerless; foliage large, 
coarse, rough, dark green, flowers blush pink. Pods about 5 ' L > inches 
long, broad-ovate in cross-section, somewhat curved, broad, with 
rounded ends and short tips, most like those of Golden Wax but 
more curved and stockier. Light yellow, brittle, stringless, almost 
fiberless, of good quality. Seeds large, nearly 1.5 cm. long, % 
as wide and half as thick, very broad oval with ends unequal, 
largely dark brown or bluish black with small, irregular whitish 
areas on one end and as broad along back quite distinct. 

Lima Wax. Refs. 48, 49. The early popu- 
larity of this variety, originated with Rogers Bros, and 
introduced by several seedsmen in 1896, was undoubtedly 
due to the name. This was not based on any essential 
characters like pods or seeds, but on the fine, glossy 
foliage and peculiar, small flowers like those of dwarf 
limas. 

Plant of medium size, slender-stemmed, very spreading, 
with many short, runner-like branches, often trailing on the ground; 
foliage fine, stiff, smooth, glossy; leaflets smaller than those of 
Refugee, but broad in proportion to length. Flowers small, white. 
Pod short, in shape like those of Burlingame field bean, but with 
shorter neck, straight, flat, very narrow ovate in cross-section with 
acuminate ventral edge, unfilled by beans, not fleshy, smooth- 
surfaced, greenish yellow or medium yellow, stringy, fibrous, rathe 
tough, only fair quality. Tip very short, centered. Seeds white, 
ovate, small, about J j, inch long, ] ,j inch wide, and nearly as thick. 

Long D-uarf German Wax. Refs. 97, 98. Syn. 
Dwarf German Wax. This white-seeded wax bean, 
grown in the early trials at Geneva and described by 
Wing, is inseparable in history and synonymy from 
White Wax. The description shows the plant as taller, 



more branching, with darker green, more curly foliage, 
slightly longer pods, and longer, much more slender, 
kidney-shaped beans. These were more than J o inch 
long, }.[ inch wide, and only slightly flattened, weighing 
85 to 90 to the ounce. 

Lyonnaise Wax. Refs. 83, 90. This was a French 
variety evidently quite new when introduced into the 
United States by Noll in 1902. No detailed descrip- 
tion has been found, but the wax-podded form was 
undoubtedly derived from White Lyonnaise and was 
similar to it in plant and seed. 

Market Wax. Refs. 41, 48, 62. Henderson intro- 
duced Market Wax in 1902 having secured the seed 
from a grower in Genesee County, N. Y. In early 
descriptions it was said to combine the good qualities 
of Long Yellow Six Weeks with the qualities of a fine, 
flat-podded wax bean. Since Market Wax is similar 
in usefulness and value to Wardwell, this variety may 
have been the other parent. As compared to Ward- 
well, the pods are straighter, more stringy, and flatter 
without tendency to recurve, with longer points. The 
plants are more erect in growth with smaller, lighter- 
colored leaves. In season, second early, continuing to 
bear over a long period. 

Pods quite attractive, medium yellow, of fair quality; con- 
taining when ripe 6 or 7 crowded seeds, rather more than half an 
inch long, about two-thirds as wide and half as thick, broad oval, 
oval oblong or ovate in outline, round oval in cross-section with 
short -rounded ends, sometimes truncate; straw yellow, olive yellow 
or coppery yellow in color, with darker eye-ring. 

Maule Butter. Refs. 48, 91. This variety should 
not be confused with Maule's Improved Butter Wax 
since it is an old variety originated with Keeney and 
introduced by Maule in 1889. 

Plant dwarf and spreading but runnerless; with foliage of 
medium size, broad, coarse, crumpled and wrinkled, thick, dark 
green. Flowers white. Pods about 5 inches long, decidedly 
curved with neck often bent back, heavy, " double-barrelled," 
sharply constricted between beans, with very short, thick tips, 
thick-walled, very brittle, stringless and fiberless, of excellent 
quality, deep yellow; seeds 5, crowded, practically same size, shape, 
color and marking as those of Keeney Rustless. 

Michigan White Wax. Refs. 99. This is a strain 
of White Wax introduced by Ferry in 1907 as an 
improved strain, being earlier, more productive, and 
with better shaped pods. The original introducer 
also compared it with Ferry's Golden Wax, but claimed 
it superior to that variety in having a larger, more 
robust plant with heavier foliage and with white seeds. 

Plant erect, with stout stem and very rigid branches, few to 
medium in number; foliage scanty to medium, dark to medium 
green, almost glossy, almost smooth medium in thickness; leaflets 
4x3 inches for the terminals and a half-inch smaller in each dimen- 
sion for laterals, widest one-fourth distance from base, sides slanting 
quite uniformly to rather short, sharp point. Flowers white. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; light yellow in 
color. Quality fair; brittle and stringless for a short time, later 
becoming tough, rather fibrous and coarse in texture. Size short, 
medium broad and slender (3?4-4j2 x>2"!i inches), containing 
5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval to broad oval in cross-section, 
slightly to moderately curved, humpbacked, regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge and rounded to truncate on the 
end. Spur short, thick and moderately curved. Suture, placental 
is slightly rounded and carpellary, obtuse. 



66 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Seeds medium, 1.1 X .75 x .6 cm. (90 per oz.); oval, quite 
broad, fairly plump; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. Hilum 
small and decidedly protuberant. Color dull white, marked with 
a decided grayish vein-like under pattern. 

Mohawk Wax. Refs. 9, 14, 29, 57, 59, 67, 68, 94. 

Landreth introduced this variety in 1903 as Landreth's 
Mammoth-seeded Golden Wax Mohawk. This name 
was changed at least three times, and we have selected 
the most characteristic. The variety is said to have 
come from a cross between Mohawk and the Crimson 
strain of Flageolet Wax. Though recommended as a 
triple-purpose variety, it never won a place, and was 
dropped within 10 years. It was very early and bore 
a heavy crop. Martens (Gartboh. 57. 1869), under 
Phaseolus oblongus Sargentone, or Bunte Wein- 
bohne, describes a bean, seeds of which came to him from 
Canada and from Louisiana. Pods of this bean were 
straw yellow, flushed with brownish red and the seeds 
were like those of Mohawk. 

Pods oval, stringless, 4 to 6 inches long and similar in shape to 
those of Mohawk or Long Yellow Six Weeks, but lemon yellow in 
color sometimes flushed rose. Seeds similar to those of Mohawk 
in shape and color, but apparently larger. 

■Monarch Wax. Refs. 48, 91. This is a little- 
known variety which originated with Darch and Hunter, 
a Canadian seed firm, in 1902, and except for descrip- 
tions by Tracy and Jarvis from the originator's seeds, 
seems to be unknown in the United States. It is similar 
in many ways to Wardwell Wax, but with foliage lighter 
colored, pods slightly shorter, stockier, and fleshy; 
and seeds less heavily marked. 

Monster Stringless Wax. A lesser variety intro- 
duced by Vaughan in 1907 and still carried by him. 
Distribution was suspended at various periods through 
the failure of seed crops, or because the variety was con- 
sidered rather too uneven in pods. In season it is 
slightly later than that of Wardwell and not as 
productive. 

Plant very dwarf to bear such long pods, but stiff stems, 
rigid branches and curving of pod tips usually prevent soil staining; 
foliage coarse dark green. Pods 6 to 6 1 _> inches long, but variable, 
very broad, almost J^ inch, broad-oval in cross-section with obtuse 
ventral edge, decidedly curved toward tip, almost loment like, 
somewhat zig-zag thru swelling on opposite sides over alternate 
beans, ends rounded, almost blunt, with rather short heavy sharply 
pointed tip from dorsal edge. Stringless, almost fiberless, tender, 
of better than fair quality, waxy light yellow. Seeds much like 
those of Detroit Wax, but much larger, about 55 to the ounce, 
proportionately longer, distinctly oblong-ovate, and usually with 
smaller regularly outlined blotch about eye, occasionally with faint 
line over end of bean, but without " Butterfly " markings. 

Napoleon Stringless. The Michigan Seed Com- 
pany obtained this as the result of a cross between 
Yosemite and a white-seeded variety. The original 
description made at the time of its introduction in 
1906 pictured a variety with long, round pods with 
strong yellow color, good in quality and white seeded. 

Pencil Pod. Refs. 41, 48, 53, 69, 77, 91, 99. Syns. 
Golden Scimitar, Giant Stringless Wax, Round Pod 
Prolific Black Wax. By many considered the highest 
quality wax bean in the entire list, this variety stands as 
one of the best varieties originated through the efforts 



of Calvin Keeney of LeRoy, New York. Johnson and 
Stokes were the introducers in 1900. The year this 
monograph was published Pencil Pod was offered by 
more seedsmen than any other variety. Davis Wax 
and Brittle Wax are its leading rivals for popularity. 
The evidence as to its true parentage is confusing. By 
many it is considered to be the result of a natural cross 
between Improved Prolific Black Wax and Round Pod 
Refugee Wax. The original seed, however, was grown 
in a patch of Prolific Black Wax where Mr. Keeney 
selected a few individual plants. Pencil Pod is grown 
widely by both home gardeners and market gardeners 
because of its fine quality and handsome appearance. 
It is unfortunate in having black seed, otherwise it 
would be equally popular as a canning bean. In season, 
intermediate at Geneva, the snap beans ready in 50 to 
55 days, about 1 week later than Challenge Black Wax, 
2 days later than Sure Crop, and 10 days earlier than 
Hodson Wax. Similar in season to Brittle Wax, 
Unrivalled Wax, and Golden Wax. Pencil Pod and 
Brittle Wax are similar in season, but the plants of 
Brittle Wax are somewhat smaller, more upright, not 
so spreading and open; the leaves are smaller and lighter 
green; the flowers white: and the seeds are quite differ- 
ent (white with black eye splashing). Pencil Pod differs 
from German Black Wax in having decidedly longer, 
straighter pods, being later in season, being more pro- 
ductive, and in having a much larger vine. Livingston's 
Pencil Pod introduced in 1899 (P. P. 1900) by the seed 
house of that name is entirely different. 

Plant strictly dwarf, usually 12-15 inches high, 15-18 inches 
spread; stocky, rather erect, moderately open, spreading when fully 
grown, yet holding pods well off the ground; very vigorous, produc- 
tive with long bearing season. Stem stout, rigid, round, smooth 
to slightly ridged; branches comparatively few, long. Green 
stemmed with slight show of purple at ends of branches, nodes and 
on flower stalk. Foliage abundant, of a rich, medium dark green; 
leaflets large and broad, thick in texture, rough crumpled, heavy 
veining, very slight fine pubescence, 3 } 2—4 inches long, terminal 
one often nearly as broad, laterals decidedly narrower, broadest 
one-fourth distance from base, sides rounding to rather short, 
abruptly pointed tips. Flowers phlox pink. 

Pods borne both above and below foliage; medium to light 
dull yellow in color. Quality excellent; fleshy, stringless, quite 
fiberless, and fine texture. Size medium to long, narrow, and plump 
(5} 2-6 x n x Js inches), containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape 
round, broad oval to nearly circular in cross-section, much curved 
to scimitar, creasebacked, regular, somewhat crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip and edge, end pointed. Spurs medium long, fairly 
thick and slightly recurved. Suture, placental is indented somewhat 
and carpellary, rounded to obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.5 x .7 x .7 cm. (85-90 per oz.), oblong to 
subcylindrical, usually somewhat flattened, abruptly rounded 
to truncate ends. Hilum small, flat, portion of placental vascular 
tissue often adhering to it. Color shining jet black over entire 
surface. 

Pink-Eye Wax. Refs. 14, 63, 84. This is closely 
allied to Golden-eyed Wax and was introduced by 
Landreth in 1889. The Kansas Station reported it as 
inseparable from Golden Wax, but with the spotted 
portion of the bean more restricted. Irish reports it 
different from Detroit Wax only in the pinkish color 
of the markings. It was listed by about a dozen seeds- 
men in 1901, but is now unknown. The Pink-eye 




PROFUSION WAX 



(Natural size) 




NEW WAX 



i, Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



67 



grown in our recent tests is green-podded, with longer 
seeds. 

Prolific Black Wax. Refs. 9, 45, 48, 84, 91, 93, 

94. Syns. Butter Stringless, Cylinder Black Wax, 
Improved Black Wax, Prolific German Black Wax. 
This old variety, which has outlived its parent, originated 
from several plants selected by Calvin Keeney and 
W. W. Tracy, Sr., in a field of German Black Wax in 
Genesee County, N. Y., and was introduced in 1888 
by several seedsmen. The chief points of difference 
between this variety and the parent German Black 
Wax are season, which is from 1 to 3 days earlier, pods 
that show a weaker yellow color with a shade of red on 
neck and a reddish line along both sutures, and flower 
stalks and branches that show more purple. The pod 
size is slightly smaller, possibly J 4 to } 2 inch shorter, 
straighter, and more slender. The plant has less 
coarse foliage, with smaller and smoother leaves; similar 
to German Black Wax. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage, light yellow in color. 
Quality excellent; brittle, tender, entirely stringless and fiberless 
and moderately fine in texture. Size medium short, rather narrow 
and slender (4-5 x fj- x J$ inch), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. 
Shape round, nearly circular in cross-section, scimitar curved, 
straight to slightly creasebacked, regular, very crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip and the edge and nearly rounded at the end. Spur 
medium long, slender and curved. Suture, placental is flat to 
slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds small to medium, 1.15 x .65 x .45 cm. (95-100 per oz.); 
oval, fairly plump to somewhat flattened; ends rounded and occa- 
sionally somewhat truncate. Hilum small, flattened with a tendency 
for a portion of the placental suture to adhere to it. Color shining 
jet black (similar to German Black Wax) over the entire surface. 

Refugee Wax. Refs. 15, 41, 47, 48, 49, 56, 59, 
69, 77, 80, 81, 84, 91, 99. Syns. Bolgiano's New Wax, 
Epicure Wax, Eureka Everbearing Wax, Keeeny's 
Refugee Wax, Livingston's Pencil Pod Wax, Profusion 
Wax. The form of Refugee Wax now grown was selected 
some time before 1897 by Keeney in a field of the old 
strain (with stringy pods) of Refugee Wax. This older 
form, or the first wax pod of this type, was introduced 
in 1890 by J. M. Thorburn & Co. as Thorburn's 
Refugee Wax, coming as a sport from Extra Early 
Refugee (greenpod). D. M. Ferry & Co. also offered 
an improved type which had been selected from the 
old Thorburn strain. In 1900, Livingston offered 
Livingston's Pencil -pod Wax. This was different from 
the Pencil Pod Wax offered the same year by Johnson 
and Stokes and by Tracy was considered the same as 
the Stringless Refugee Wax. All strains of Refugee 
Wax grown at Geneva during the last few years have 
proved to be stringless. It is better known as a good 
all round sort, although its long season is attractive to 
both home gardener and canner. In canning quality 
it is probably second only to Brittle Wax and to New 
Kidney Wax, due to the somewhat light yellow color 
of the pods and a tendency to produce curved pods in 
dry season, as well as the dark seed coat color and the 
green color of smaller sized pods. A second early 
variety, 51 days to edible pods, the same in season as 
Brittle Wax, Pencil Pod, and Davis. The foliage can 
be compared only to other stocks of Refugee. The pods 



probably most resemble Prolific Black Wax, although 
they are more slender, with a curved or hooked point 
and faintly splashed with purple. 

Plant medium, 12 to 14 inches tall with spread of about 15 
inches, appears to be quite spreading and squatty due to peculiar 
characteristic growth; vigor good, very productive over long 
season. Stem slender, base short, round, ridged above, internodes 
short; branches many, becoming almost runnerlike and with slender 
secondaries, often trailing, wholly green. Foliage dense, abundant, 
dark grayish green, dull, smooth surface, finely veined, thin; leaflets 
very small, 2?± to 3}j inches long, slender, only about 1?4 to 2 ] 3 
inches wide at more than one-third distance from base, with sides 
almost straight or gently incurved to long rather sharp tips. Flowers 
phlox purple. 

Pods borne mostly below foliage; light yellow, splashed with 
purple color in green shell stage. Quality good; brittle, tender, 
stringless, nearly fiberless and occasionally slightly coarse in texture. 
Size short to medium, medium to broad but quite plump (3} ■>— 5 
x ? s~ie x 5s inches), containing 5 seeds in a pod. Shape nearly 
round circular to cordate in cross-section, much curved, straight- 
backed, regular, occasionally slightly crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and edge, and rounded to truncate on the end. Spur medium 
short, thick, and recurved. Suture, placental is flat to slightly 
indented and carpellary, rounded. 

Seeds medium, 1.3 x .7 x .6 cm. (100 per oz.). Subcylindrical 
or very slightly reniform, nearly circular in cross-section; abruptly 
rounded to somewhat pointed ends. Hilum small, flat. Color 
dark bluish-black (urania blue) mottled with pale buff (tilleul- 
buff) over the entire surface. 

Royal Purple Wax. Syns. Mammoth Stringless 
White Pod, Royal Wax, Stringless Yellow Pod. This 
variety, which has found its usefulness chiefly in the 
midwest, originated about 1900 as a sport in a field of 
beans grown in Michigan by H. A. Johns, then president 
of the Sioux City Seed Company. Mr. Johns found the 
single plant and saved some seed. Since the pods were 
very attractive, the stock was increased and introduced 
to the trade as Royal Purple Wax. Seed of this variety 
is quite individual in shape and color, indicating that 
it is probably a hybrid. Nothing is known as to the 
name of the variety growing in the field where it was 
found. At Geneva it was one of the earliest with pods 
ready to pick in 47 to 49 days, only a day or so later than 
Challenge. In length and plumpness the pod resembles 
Challenge Black Wax but is somewhat broader and 
lacks the long slender tip as well as being of a deep 
waxy yellow color. It compares with Crystal White 
Wax in tenderness. The foliage resembles that of 
Valentine Wax. 

Plant small to medium, 12 to 14 inches tall with spread of 
15 to 17 inches; erect, compact, runnerless; vigor good, yield 
moderate over fairly long season; stems stout, round, internodes 
short; branches few, green throughout. Foliage abundant, medium 
to dark green, dull, only slightly roughened, medium veined, thick; 
leaflets 3 } 2 inches long, 3 inches wide, terminal leaflet quite rounded, 
side leaflets more quadrangular. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods borne very largely above the foliage; medium light 
yellow in color, later slightly tinted with purple. Quality good to 
excellent; stringless, fiberless, brittle, quite fleshy but rather coarse 
in texture. Size medium long, broad and quite plump (4—5 x 
"n - 1 2 x re inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, 
nearly circular in cross-section, much curved, distinctly crease- 
backed, moderately constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and the edge and moderately rounded on the end. Spur 
moderately long, stout; slightly curved and then recurved. Suture, 
placental is indented and carpellary, decidedly rounded. 



68 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Seeds medium small, 1.2 x .75 x .65 cm., containing 75-80 
seeds per oz. Shape very short oval, plump, broad oval thru cross- 
section; ends abruptly rounded and occasionally somewhat truncate. 
Hilum small, flattened. Color dark reddish purple (dark perilla 
to deep livid purple) and sparsely splashed with a tawny drab 
(light vinaceous cinnamon). Occasionally a narrow eye-ring of 
the same color is apparent. 

Speckled Wax. Refs. 13, 48, 49, 58, 59, 67, 

68, 85, 91. This variety was introduced by Buist in 
1887, had a limited distribution up to 1901, was still 
carried by one seedsman in 1906, and then disappeared. 

Plant large, erect, vigorous, hardy, with abundant, coarse, 
dark green foliage like that of Kidney Wax. Flowers pink. Pods 
straight, round, tender, stringless in early stages, but tough, quite 
stringy and fibrous later, yellowish waxy white in color splashed 
with crimson when at green-shell stage. Seeds ■' g inch long, half 
as wide, broad oval as viewed sidewise, narrow-oval or oblong with 
rounded ends as seen from edge, reddish buff, sparingly splashed 
reddish purple which soon changes to dark seal brown or black. 
Seeds much like those of Dwarf Golden Carmine, recently intro- 
duced; and quite unlike Hardy Wax or Hodson Wax. 

Stringless Wax. Two varieties are included under 
this name because of the extreme similarity of their 
seeds, which are indistinguishable from those of the 
parent variety, Burpee Stringless Green Pod, and because 
of certain general resemblances between them. Olds 
Late Stringless Wax was introduced by Olds in 1921, and 
as tested here clearly shows its relationship to Burpee 
Stringless Green Pod, although somewhat smaller in 
plant, with longer, more slender leaflets, and with 
rounder, more curved, slightly more slender pods rather 
slow in yellowing. The pods are of good color when 
ready, stringless and fiberless, fine in quality, but a trifle 
coarser in texture than Pencil Pod. The variety follows 
Early Stringless Wax in season and was among our most 
productive wax pod varieties. Stringless Wax of the 
Portland Seed Company was introduced by them in 
1928. From one season's test at Geneva it appears 
similar to the variety above, but with straighter, longer- 
tipped pods, decidedly earlier in season, and edible pods 
produced over a longer period. 

Sure Crop. Refs. 77. Syns. Monarch Wax, New 
Sure Crop Stringless Wax, Sure Crop Stringless Wax, 
Yellow Bountiful. Sure Crop has gradually increased 
in importance until it ranks as a leading flat -podded 
wax bean. It originated with Keeney and was intro- 
duced by Dreer, Thorburn, and others about 1911. In 
many ways it resembles Currie Wax and is said by some 
to be a selection from it. However, uncertainty in the 
originator's notes makes it impossible to determine 
which view is correct. It is a leading sort for home or 
market use because of the attractiveness and the excel- 
lent quality of the pods. One of the early varieties, 49 
days at Geneva, only a few days later than Challenge; 
in season with Pencil Pod, Ward well's and Cracker Jack. 
The variety is very much like Currie Wax, but with 
pods of better quality being entirely without string. 
Sure Crop is practically indistinguishable from Yellow 
Bountiful. Earliest Market is similar to Sure Crop but 
has pods with more string, as indicated by the rigid tip 
of pod. 

Plant large, 14 to 16 inches high with spread of 15 inches, 
spreading but runnerless, compact; vigorous, productive over long 



bearing season; stem moderately stout, comparetively few branches, 
green thruout. Foliage medium to abundant, medium green, 
rough crumpled, thick; leaflets large, 4 :t 4 x 4 :i 4 inches, widest one- 
third to one-fourth the distance from base, roundish or almost 
quadrangular, sides slightly incurving just before short abruptly 
pointed tips. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods borne intermediate; medium dull yellow in color. 
Quality very good; brittle, stringless, with small amount of fiber 
and fine textured. Size medium long, slender and fairly broad, 
(5-5} o x 32 x ?s inches), containing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat, ovate in cross-section, straight to slightly curved, straight 
backed, regular, crowded, smooth, filled to the tip, and rounded at 
the end. Spur long, slender and straight to slightly curved. Suture, 
placental is very slightly indented to flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.5 x .7 x .6 cm. (70-75 per oz.), oval to sub- 
reniform, fairly plump; abruptly rounded to occasionally truncate 
ends. Hilum small, flat to slightly protuberant. Color shining 
jet black over entire surface. 

Unrivalled Wax. Refs. 13, 51, 93, 94. This 
variety first appeared in the catalog of Vilmorin- 
Andrieux & Company in 1909 as Haricots beurre nain 
sans rival. At the time of its introduction it was de- 
scribed as a variety with beautiful yellow pods which 
were fleshy and absolutely without parchment. Appar- 
ently it was brought to America by D. M. Ferry 85 
Company of Detroit since its first offering in this country 
was in their catalog of 1913. Its parentage is not given. 
In 1921 it was listed in only seven catalogs, while in 
1931 approximately one-fourth of all companies issuing 
catalogs list Unrivalled as a worthwhile sort. However, 
since the pods are relatively narrow, long, and slender, 
it is probable that Unrivalled will not be able to com- 
pete with Pencil Pod or Sure Crop as a market bean 
nor with Kidney Wax as a canning variety. Its earliness 
and good quality should aid its popularity for a home 
garden bean. It also has the reputation of doing well 
under drought conditions. The pods show clear yellow 
color at an early stage, and therefore can be picked as 
butter beans when quite small. At Geneva its season 
was 50 days, about the same as Golden Wax and Pencil 
Wax. 

Plant very dwarf, erect, stocky, often only from 9 to 12 
inches high and with an average spread of about one foot, indicating 
a rather small plant. Stem stout, round, smooth; branches few, 
rigid, and holding pods well off of the ground. Moderate in vigor 
but yield good for size of plant. Foliage medium and moderately 
abundant, dark green, glossy, smooth, rather thin, veiny, light; 
leaflets long, 4 to 4) ■_> inches, slender, 2 ' ■• to 2 3 4 inches wide, greatest 
width very near base with sides of leaflets almost straight and 
rather long; tips moderately taper-pointed. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne intermediate; medium light dull yellow in color. 
Quality good; brittle, tender, stringless, quite fiberless but some- 
what coarse in texture. Size short to medium, rather narrow and 
slender (4j^-5 x ?s - i 7 6 x J 4 X yg inches), containing about 6 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, oval to ovate in cross-section, slightly curved, 
straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip 
and edge, and rounded at the end. Spur moderately long, slender 
and straight with a slight tendency to recurve. Suture, placental 
is flat to very slightly indented and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds very small to small, 1.1 x .5 x .45 cm. (,145-150 per oz.), 
long oval to cylindrical, slightly subreniform, plump; rounded to 
somewhat truncate ends. Hilum small, flat. Color bright golden 
fawn to golden brown (tawny) over entire surface, marked with 
narrow, dark olive green to brown eye-ring. 

Valentine Wax. Refs. 3, 16, 47, 48, 87, 91. Syns. 
Golden Stringless, Miller's Early Golden Stringless. 




^ 



■ 



It 



MAMMOTH STRINGLESS WHITE POD WAX 





STRINGLESS YELLOW POD WAX 




i Natural size) 



DWARF WAX PODS 




Natural size) 



SADDLE BACK WAX 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



69 



Thorbum in 1885 offered a new improved Extra Early 
Valentine with wax pods which was said to have origi- 
nated with T. V. Maxon, Jefferson County, N. Y. The 
color of the seeds indicates a close relationship to Red 
Valentine. As a member of the Valentine family, at 
one time it was quite widely grown, but of late years it 
is seldom offered since in trial it has proved to be lacking 
in vigor and yield. It always was among the earliest 
of wax podded varieties, 47 days at Geneva, which is 
only 1 day later than Challenge Black Wax. The pods 
are larger, straighter, and lighter in color with longer 
tips than the pods of Challenge Black Wax, while the 
plant is much smaller and more bushy. It differs from 
its parent variety in color and stringlessness of pods, as 
well as in having somewhat wider leaflets and a more 
compact plant. 

Plant small, 1 foot tall or less, with narrow spread in row, 
erect, compact, without runners; not especially vigorous, of weak 
growth, low productivity with short bearing period. Stem slender, 
branches low and few, green throughout. Foliage medium in 
amount, dark to medium green, smooth, dull, thick; leaflets 4 
inches long, 3} s inches wide near base, margins rounding to stem 
and almost straight to poorly denned short tip. Flowers blush 
pink. 

Pods borne mostly above the foliage; medium yellow in color. 
Quality fair to good; brittle, stringy, practically fiberless, but rather 
coarse in texture. Size medium short, rather narrow, and fairly 
plump i4 ] ,-5 x ?),— « x 5^ inch), containing 4-5 seeds per pod. 
Shape round, fairly broad, oval to cordate in cross-section, moder- 
ately curved, creasebacked, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled 
to the tip and edge, and abruptly tapering at the end. Spur 
moderately long, quite stout, and straight. Suture, placental is 
indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.3 x .7 x .6 cm. (85-90 per oz.), oblong, oval, 
somewhat cylindrical, plump, nearly round in cross-section; ends 
abruptly rounded and occasionally truncate. Hilum small, 
flattened. Color light fawn (yinaceous cinnamon) blotched and 
splashed over 95' ~ c of the surface with varying shades of dull red 
(vandyke to acajon red). 

WardweU Kidney Wax. Refs. 9, 14, 16, 30, 35, 

41, 45, 47, 48, 49, 56, 58, 59, 61, 63, 66, 67, 68, 69, 77, 
78, 84, 91, 93, 94, 99. Syns. Kidney Wax, Milliken's 
Wax, Wardwell's Delicious Wax, White Kidney Wax. 
On the trial grounds of Rogers Bros, and R. B. Hunger- 
ford, Jefferson County, N. Y., a seed of a new type 
was found and developed by Mr. Charles Wardwell 
sometime between 1880 and 1885. Several seedsmen 
introduced it about the same time, Thorbum in 1887 
and Johnson & Stokes and Ferry in 1888. Whether or 
not this variety was a natural hybrid or came from a 
seed mixture from foreign sources is not known. There 
are several American varieties with seed of similar 
color and shape, but they had been known or commonly 
grown in this country before Wardwell's and were not 
seed of wax-podded varieties. Wardwell's is particu- 
larly valuable for the home and market garden, and 
has been long used as a main crop variety which, under 
good growing conditions, yields an abundant crop on 
rather showy plants. An early sort with pods ready in 
48 days at Geneva, 3 days behind Challenge Black 
Wax but in season with Sure Crop and Pencil Pod. 
Perhaps this variety is most like Golden Wax, although 
2 or 3 days later. The pods are about 1 inch longer 
than Golden Wax pods, a trifle wider and slightly curved 



backwards at the stem end, while the spurs are smaller 
and start more from the center of the end of the pod. 
The plant itself is rather distinct in its somewhat low 
heavy open growth. 

Plant medium, height 12 to 15 inches, with spread of about 14 
inches in row; fairly erect, somewhat spreading, with few spreading 
branches, very open plant without runners; vigor good, bearing 
period and productiveness only moderate. Stem stout, ridged, 
intemodes short, branches few, green thruout. Foliage scanty to 
medium, dark green, glossy, slightly rough surface, thick, crumpled, 
rather coarse looking; leaflets about 4 inches long, 3 inches wide, 
widest } ;j distance from base, quite round without distinct shoulders, 
moderately long, rather obtuse, points slightly curved just before 
tip. Flowers white, cream with age. 

Pods borne below the foliage; medium dull yellow in color. 
Quality fair; practically stringless, fairly brittle, some fiber, and 
rather coarse in texture. Size long, broad, and rather slender 
(5J4-6 x }j s M inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat, long oval or narrow ovate in cross-section, straight to slightly 
curved, straight backed but occasionally slightly creasebacked, 
regular, fairly crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and 
rounded to blunt on the end. Spur very short, stout and straight. 
Suture, placental is slightly indented and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.5 x .8 x .6 cm. (55-60 per oz.); 
oblong, reniform, fairly plump to somewhat flattened; ends rounded 
and occasionally truncate. Hilum small, flat to slightly protuber- 
ant. Color dull white, thru which may be seen grayish vein-like 
markings; mottled and speckled irregularly with tawny yellow, 
auburn brown and a slight tinge of light purple on the whole or 
part of the hilar surface, parts of one or both ends, and occasionally 
it may appear to some extent on one or both sides. In most instances 
the shading is distinctly lighter at the hilum. 

White Flageolet Wax. Refs. 47, 63. This is a 
German variety which originated about 1896 and which 
was included in the trials at the Missouri Botanical 
Garden. It was found to be identical with the field 
bean White Flageolet except for its bright yellow, tender 
pods. 

White Stringless Wax. This was a novelty intro- 
duced by Vaughan in 1928 and tested here for one season. 
It is probably a selection from Davis Wax, the seeds of 
the two varieties being practically indistinguishable. 
Those of the new strain, however, were slightly smaller 
with a smooth, glossy surface. 

Plant small, less than 1 foot tall, with large, light yellowish 
green foliage, showing some disease late in season, after pods have 
escaped serious injury. Pods very long, 6 J j to 7 inches, with slender 
necks from very small receptacles, less than ' j inch wide, semi- 
round, oval in cross-section, slightly constricted between beans or 
with zig-zag effect due to protrusion on opposite sides of alternate 
beans, much curved as would be expected from stringless pods, 
ends rounded, with rather long, slender, flexible tips from near 
centers, walls quite thick and fleshy, brittle, stringless, fiberless, 
medium in texture, of good quality. Seeds as above about 75 to 
the ounce. 

White Wax. Refs. 16, 47, 56, 61, 93, 94, 97, 98. 
This very old variety probably came from Germany as 
it was known to Martens. Burr, however, writing in 
America at about the same time, describes no dwarf 
wax bean. It undoubtedly split up into various types 
and strains, all of which have long since disappeared. 
With one exception, we have no way of separating the 
strains, and are wholly unable to group the synonyms 
for the two types described by Wing. From tests at 
this Station in 1882 and 1883, he describes one strain 
as follows, probably grown under unfavorable conditions: 



70 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant very dwarf, not over \ : i foot tall, stocky, not much 
branched, not twining; foliage not very abundant, medium green, 
not wrinkled; leaflets of medium size, broadly ovate, inclining to 
lozenge shape, moderately taper-pointed, laterals often irregularly 
developed. Flowers white. Pods 2? .{ to 3} 2 inches long, slightly 
curved, swollen by beans, with slender, slightly curved tip of medium 
length (others say almost translucent, butter yellow, quite broad, 
without string or fiber, but of only medium quality). Seeds 2-3 
(others 4-5); irregularly globular or slightly oblong, usually 
flattened sidewise, eye flat or slightly protuberant, pure white, 
average size slightly more than Js inch long, more than \\ inch 
wide and }i inch thick, about 75 to the ounce. 

Yellow Princess. Ref. 47. Yellow Princess has 
been known in Germany for many years, certainly 
since 1873, and was probably one of the types known to 
Martens 10 years before. It was never widely known 
in America and disappeared long ago. Since Goff's 
description is uncertain, the following has been compiled 
from Irish and Denaiffe: 

Plant J 4 to 1 foot tall, moderately vigorous, very productive, 
quite late; foliage medium green, slightly wrinkled; leaflets 3 to 
3 ,'2 inches long, 2 to 2 J 2 inches broad, slender, sharply taper- 
pointed. Flowers white. Pods 3} 2 to 5 inches long, } ■> inch or 
more broad; almost as thick, stocky, slightly constricted between 
beans, with long rounded to short rounded ends, with short, rather 
heavy, curved tip; fleshy, tender, almost fiberless, stringless until 
seeds enlarge, yellow. Seeds 5 or 6, sometimes 7, J g to J g inch long, 
two-thirds to three-fourths as broad, more than half as thick, 
yellowish brown with darker eye-ring. 

Yellow-Podded Princess. Refs. 98. This was an 
old sort of unknown origin but listed by Sibley in 1883 
and tested at this Station that year. Here it was con- 
fused with Yellow Princess from Germany which had 
brownish yellow seeds. Comparative dates show that 
edible pods were produced nearly a month later than 
those of White Wax and a week later than those of 
Yellow Princess. 

Plant strictly dwarf. Pods yellow, stringless, tender, of 
fine quality. Seeds small, oblong, slightly flattened sidewise, 
occasionally compressed at end, eye-side flat, pure dead white, 
distinguished from White Wax by smooth, rounded form and 
lusterless white. 

Yosemite. Refs. 9, 16, 23, 27, 29, 35, 41, 45, 47, 
48, 49, 59, 61, 67, 68, 81, 84, 85, 91. Syn. Yosemite 
Mammoth Bush Bean. This variety represents an 
outstanding type which originated with N. B. Keeney 
& Son, LeRoy, N. Y. It was said to have come from 
a single plant found in a field of White Wax Bush. 
It was introduced in 1889 by Peter Henderson and soon 
was a very popular variety. Because of its great vigor 
and large pods it has been used as a parent for many 
bean crosses. It is nearly 35 years since it was intro- 
duced and today there are strains which seem to have 
deteriorated from the original description as given for 
this variety. Some of these strains seem to be more 
like Celestial Wax which is a selection from the Currie 
Wax. Yosemite should still be a favorite variety to 
use as one parent in making known crosses with the 
hope of improving existing varieties. 

Season 52 to 55 days, a midseason variety, about 
10 days earlier than Hodson Wax, 3 or 4 days later than 
Pencil Pod and Round Kidney Wax. Yosemite is not 
like any other variety, being individual in both pod and 
plant characters. In some ways it seems like a very 



vigorous Pencil Pod, but the plant is much more spread- 
ing with more branches. 

Plant large, probably the largest of the black seeded wax 
type, strictly dwarf with no runners, heavily branched, drooping 
as pods reach picking stage, stocky, erect, vigorous with pods mostly 
hidden by the foliage in bearing season; height 1>4 feet with spread 
in row of 1 .' Z feet. Stem stout, slightly ridged, long internodes, 
many branches, very slightly tinged with red at nodes. Foliage 
abundant, medium green, rough surfaced, crumpled and thick, 
heavy vined, slightly pubescent; leaflets very large, very broad 
nearest base, slender pointed. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage; light yellow in color. 
Quality excellent; stringless, fiberless, brittle, tender, and of fine 
texture. Size long, moderately broad but very plump (5J^-6J^ x 
} 2 x 3 g inches), and containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape round, 
very broad oval in cross-section, deeply creasebacked and indented 
on the carpellary suture suggesting a " double-barrelled " likeness, 
S-curved as well as twisted sideways occasionally, constricted, 
fairly smooth, filled to the tip and blunt to rounded on the end. 
Spur long, moderately stout and curved. Sutures, placental and 
carpellary are both indented. 

Seeds medium, 1.5 x .7 x .6 cm. (75-80 per oz.); oblong, 
occasionally subreniform, plump; ends rounded and quite fre- 
quently one is larger than the other. Occasionally a rather prom- 
inent dorsal ridge is apparent giving the bean a boat-like shape. 
Hilum small, flat, with a tendency for a portion of the placental 
suture to adhere to it. Color shining jet black over the entire 
surface after the bloom has been removed. 

THE HORTICULTURAL OR SHELL BEANS 
The horticultural class of beans is represented by a 
small group of varieties all of which have been in existence 
for a considerable time. These varieties are character- 
ized by their smooth, flat, dark-colored leaves; by the 
pods which, in the green shell stage, are abundantly and 
brilliantly splashed with carmine or red and which are 
much swollen over the seeds; and by large tumid seeds 
with white or light buff undercolor more or less splashed 
and streaked with dark red. 

Burr says the horticultural beans were introduced 
into this country from England about 1825, but present- 
day catalogs of seedsmen of that country do not list 
these varieties and it is doubtful if the climate is adapted 
to their growth. The New Zealand Runner Kidney 
bean (Haricot de Prague Mabre) and the Araucano 
bean of Chili are probably the parent stocks of our 
present varieties. In California this class of bean is 
known as Cranberry Bean and is grown for the dry 
beans which are largely sent to eastern markets, par- 
ticularly for use in the mining districts. Eastern seeds- 
men have listed horticultural varieties since their first 
lists were published about 1822. There has been little 
improvement in the type as offered, the changes occurring 
having been directed toward producing strains with 
larger pods with better color. As a shelled bean, both 
in the green state and for dry seeds, the horticultural 
beans are remarkably farinaceous, well-flavored, and 
worthy of more extended use. 

POLE VARIETIES 

Brockton Horticultural Pole. Refs. 48, 91. 
Syns. Brockton Horticultural, Low's Brockton. While 
this is a relatively little-known variety of the horti- 
cultural class, it bears the same relation to the horti- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



71 



cultural poles that the Goddard does to the dwarfs, 
being exceptionally strong growing and vigorous. A 
gardener near Brockton, Mass., had some pods on the 
Brockton market where they were noticed by the Aaron 
Low Seed Company, who secured seed and introduced 
the variety in 1885. The pods are most handsomely 
splashed, resembling in that respect Golden Carmine. 
The pods also resemble those of Goddard Bush but are 
natter and longer. 

Plant of large growth, slow to start but covering the trellis 
well later: branches wholly green; leaflets large, long, long-pointed, 
smooth, flat, dark green. Flowers pink. 

Pods dark green in color but splashed with dull red in green 
shell stage. Quality poor; stringy, fibrous, tough, and rather coarse 
in texture. Size long, very broad and slender, I 7-8 x 3 4 x 5 $ inches), 
containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, elliptic in cross-section, 
straight, flat to slightly creasebacked, slightly constricted, not 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and sharply tapering 
at the end. Spur very long, slender and uniformly curved. Suture, 
placental is slightly indented and carpellary, moderately acute. 

Seeds large, 2.1xl.x. 8 cm. (45-50 per oz.); long reniform, 
long oval thru cross-section, fairly plump to somewhat flattened; 
ends uniformly rounded. Hilum small, flat to slightly indented. 
Color light fawn (pale pinkish buff) sparingly splashed and streaked 
with dark purplish red (violet carmine). 

Child's Horticultural. Refs. 48, 91. John Lewis 
Childs secured the stock of this variety from a farmer's 
garden in North Jay, Me., and offered seed in 1891. 
In the original description it was said to be an improve- 
ment on the well-known horticultural bean in having 
pods in clusters and in being more brilliantly splashed 
with carmine than London Horticultural. In all respects 
plant, pods, and seeds most closely resemble Brockton. 

Pods like those of Brocton, shorter, broader, having thicker 
necks and shorter tips, more curved, of even poorer quality as 
snap beans; rather more productive, with pods in clusters, of 
same or later season; very attractively marked; containing 6 to 7 
seeds, shorter and proportionately more plump, with darker back- 
ground and less pronounced markings. 

Concord Pole. Refs. 48, 91, 97. Syns. Big 
Sioux, Hemisphere, October Pole. The first mention of 
Concord was during the period between 1860 and 1865. 
The original plant was found in a garden in Concord, 
Mass., and by some is said to have been a natural hybrid 
between Lazy Wife and Early Horticultural, others 
giving the parents as London Horticultural and White 
Cranberry. It is very similar to Mottled Cranberry, 
but seed color is rather more buff drab or light brown 
than crimson. 

Plant similar to Brockton, perhaps more open in growth, with 
lighter foliage, abundant; leaflets broadly wedge obvate, slightly 
taper pointed. Flowers white. 

Pods medium green in color. Quality poor; stringy, moder- 
ately fleshy, quite tough, fibrous and medium coarse texture. Size 
medium long, very broad and quite slender, somewhat shorter and 
broader than either Brockton or Childs (5-53 o x 3 4 x f' s inches), 
containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, elliptical in cross-section, 
slightly curved, straight backed, slightly constricted, not crowded, 
rough surfaced, filled to the tip but not to the edge and rounded to 
moderately tapering at the end. Spur similar to Brockton, long, 
moderately slender, and uniformly but slightly curved. Suture, 
placental is flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 1.5 x .95 x .8 cm. (55-60 per oz.); short, broad 
oval, plump, broad oval in cross-section; ends rounded and occasion- 
ally slightly compressed. Hilum medium, flat to slightly protuber- 



ant, hilar surface somewhat raised at the immediate vicinity of the 
eye. Color two-thirds of the surface, including the upper portion 
of the sides, ends and all of the dorsal surface, white. Hilar surface 
marked with a distinct area of light dun pinkish cinnamon) splashed 
and mottled with dull red i morocco red) and a moderately wide 
yellowish (zinc orange) eye-ring. 

Crosby Horticultural. Refs. 63, 90. Syn. 
Horticultural Cranberry. This variety was named for a 
distinguished Massachusetts gardener, Josiah Crosby, 
of Arlington. Farquhar, in 1890, introduced the stock 
as the earliest of the pole horticulturals. 

Plant large grower, leaflets medium to large. Pods 3 to 4 
inches, flat, curved, thick. Seeds roundish oval, plump, light 
brown, splashed with brownish red. 

Early Horticultural. Refs. 48, 90, 91. Syns. 
Early Pole Horticultural, Little Gem, Little Wonder. 
This bean was grown privately by gardeners near Wor- 
cester, Mass., and was introduced by Ross Bros., in 1902. 
It was listed but a short time and was popular only in a 
very restricted area. The plants lacked vigor and pro- 
ductiveness, yet while the snap pods were stringless 
they were too coarse-grained and of too poor quality for 
wide use. The older pods were difficult to shell for the 
green beans. 

Foliage dark green, long, very flat leaflets. Pods large, very 
broad, decidedly constricted, dark green, much splashed with red. 
Seeds large, broad oval, fairly plump, white, streaked with pink and 
attractive in green shell stage — light fawn when ripe, irregularly 
streaked and spotted with dark red and with brown eye-ring. 

Erfurt Ruby. Refs. 45, 63. This bean, with seed 
peculiarly shouldered, was grown at Geneva and at the 
Kansas Station in 1889 and listed by both Gregory and 
Thorburn in 1890. It is of German origin, probably 
very shortly before the dates given. It is of interest 
mainly as a curiosity because of the dark carmine red 
color of the young pods, which color is coordinated with 
similar shading of stems, branches, and leaves and 
deepening of the color on the outer parts of the flowers. 
The pods lose the color in ripening, becoming almost 
white. 

Plant low, slender runners; leaflets small, dark green, deeply 
wrinkled. Pods 6 to 8 inches long, 3 4 inch wide, usually irregularly 
curved. Seeds 4 to 6, more than ' 2 inch long, nearly two-thirds as 
wide, broad kidney-shaped, with unequal ends, fairly plump, light 
greenish brown or brownish pink, veined deeper, with dark brown 
eye-ring. 

Harlequin. Ferry introduced Harlequin in 1913 
without stating the origin. It is not the French variety 
with similar name. As grown at Geneva it proved to 
be a fine type of Horticultural pole bean, improved in 
earliness and productivity over London Horticultural, 
with longer and plumper pods. 

Plants vigorous, above medium height for type; foliage light 
colored, large; pods of Rust-proof Intermediate Horticultural type, 
5 J -i to 6 ! 4 inches long, straight, with rounded ends and rather long, 
curved rigid tips, about 3 4 inch long, very broad oval in cross-section, 
with flat dorsum and obtusely-pointed ventrum, smooth, well filled 
by the beans, only slightly constricted, rather tough, stringy, coarse- 
textured, not suitable for snaps, medium, green marked, purplish 
carmine, attractve but not showing yellow for contrast. Seeds 
large, sometimes .' 2 inch long, broad ovate or almost oblong, very 
plump, with rounded, not truncate ends, typical Horticultural 
markings but darker in shade than most of group. 



72 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Horticultural Lima. Refs. 85. Syn. Giant Hor- 
ticultural. This variety is an anomaly among beans, and 
showed certain characters that led to the name and gave 
support to the belief that the variety came from an acci- 
dental, or field cross, between Dreer Improved Pole Lima 
(Challenger) and Horticultural Pole (Speckled Cran- 
berry) or Dwarf Horticultural which stood near each other 
on the place of J. H. (Alex J.-Tracy) Hodges, Pepton, 
Addison Co., Vt. In 1885, Mr. Hodges found a pod of six 
beans, from which Horticultural Lima resulted. He grew 
it two years, and placed most of the stock in the hands of 
O. H. Alexander, of Charlotte, Vt. The latter sold the 
variety to Childs, who introduced it in 1891. Ferry 
listed it in 1893 and after two years tests commended it 
highly, as did Gregory in 1894. It was said to be as early 
as Dwarf Horticultural and to yield good crops of fine 
quality green-shell beans. Gregory could not recognize 
any of the lima flavor with which others credited it. 
It was listed by 20 seedsmen in 1901. 

The possibility of a cross between beans of the two 
species Phaseolus vulgaris and P. lunatis is denied by 
botanists and plant breeders, all evidence is lacking in 
the case of Gregory's Curious Pole, and nothing definite 
supports Burbank's claim of a similar cross. We are 
forced to conclude that certain peculiarities, possibly 
due to " sporting " of one of the horticultural varieties, 
or to a cross between tall and dwarf varieties in that 
group, misled Hodges and others into believing that a 
cross had taken place with Challenger as the male parent. 
Somewhat similar beans have arisen from inter -varietal 
crosses between tall horticultural varieties with seeds 
approaching globular and other varieties, like Boston 
Favorite (Goddard) and Crimson Beauty, which have 
seeds similarly marked, but long, kidney-shaped, or 
oblong. 

Plants of Horticultural Lima were rather small for pole type, 
not much branched, moderately vigorous; leaflets large, coarse, 
wrinkled like those of Dwarf Horticultural; flowers starting near 
ground, of medium size, white. Pods in clusters, 4 to 6 inches long, 
almost straight (gently curved in Gregory's figure), with long- 
rounded ends and short, curved, almost central tips, flat type but 
quite plump, swollen over beans and constricted between them, 
dark green, occasionally marked purple. Seeds 3 to 6, about shape 
and size of Dreer Lima (Ferry), shape between kidney and lima 
(Mich. Sta.), that is, very broad oval with straight eye-line, about 
3 _■ inch long, three-fourths as wide, quite plump, marked like Dwarf 
Horticultural, but ground color slightly darker. 

Italian Pole. Breck of Boston listed this variety 
for several years. Seed has been grown at Geneva for 
three years; and while it is of a horticultural type, it is 
not the same as any of old familiar " Horts." During 
the last five years there have been several new " Italian " 
beans offered. The description offered is taken from 
Breck's Italian Pole. The Italian bean of California is 
a strain of Speckled Cranberry or London Horticultural. 

Plant climbing well, 4 ! > feet or more with spread of 2 feet at 
base; foliage abundant, dark green, leaflets somewhat crumpled, 
slightly rough, medium veined, medium thick. Flowers phlox pink. 

Pods much like those of Lazy Wife, 43-5 to 5 inches, broad, 
straight to slightly curved, quite plump, brittle, stringless, almost 
fiberless, with fairly thick walls, medium in texture and of more than 
fair quality; light green in color, " silky " or silvered, not so spotted 



or splashed with red as American types; but developing rather late 
a marked rustlike bright carmine color which gives a pleasing appear- 
ance. Seeds are nearly as large as those of Worcester and attractively 
marked either green or dry. Color a dark background with broad 
zebra markings, one usually over dorsum, that are of a bronzy or 
greenish brown color which darkens to seal brown without red. 

King Horticultural. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. Hamp- 
den, Mammoth Podded Horticultural, Mug Wump, 
New Zealand Runner Kidney Bean, Worcester. This 
bean was grown by a market gardener near Worcester, 
Mass., for several years and was introduced in 1894 
and 1895 by several seedsmen under different names. 
Of these, Gregory's Mammoth Carmine Podded Horti- 
cultural has apparent priority, but owing to its length 
and its similarity to names of other pole and dwarf 
varieties, the name Worcester, used by W. W. Raw- 
son, and based on the place of origin, was favored for 
many years. The name King Horticultural has become 
more popular in recent years and is used in New York 
State. It is a late variety, only fairly productive but 
not especially subject to disease. It has increased in 
popularity since 1906, but at present is little grown 
except in eastern Massachusetts and New York. 

This is the largest-podded and largest-seeded of the Horti- 
cultural beans, and most attractively colored and most showy in 
pod. It is most like Early Horticultural, but with longer pods, 
reaching 6 or sometimes 7 inches, much swollen over the seeds, 
which are often 7 in number, 2, 3 inch long, nearly three-fourths as 
wide and about two-thirds as thick, colored like those of London 
Horticultural, about 40 to the ounce. 

London Horticultural. Refs. 10, 12, 13, 15, 20, 

43, 44, 48, 52, 59, 63, 67, 68, 77, 91, 97, 98. Syns. 
Arancauo, Bird-Egg Bean, Cherry Pole, Horticultural 
Cranberry Pole, Housewives Delight, Moro, Scipio Pole, 
Speckled Cranberry, Wrens Egg. This variety, under 
some of its names, is probably our earliest horticultural 
type bean. Hendry of the California Station says it is 
evidently the Arancano of Chile. If this is the case, the 
bean undoubtedly came into the East in trading vessels 
and probably went to Europe in the same way, where it 
became known to Savi and later to Martens. It was 
certainly known before 1860 in the United States, the 
earliest date given by Tracy and Jarvis. Burr says it 
came to America from England about 1825. It is 
undoubtedly the most popular, and probably the best 
of the tall horticulturals. The use of the name Horti- 
cultural Pole and other synonyms for varieties other 
than London Horticultural make it impossible to fix 
the exact range of popularity. 

It was grown at this Station in 1882 as Horticultural 
(London Horticultural) and as Cranberry, which Wing 
considered identical, though data show the latter decid- 
edly earlier and less productive. In recent tests London 
Horticultural, Horticultural Pole, and Horticultural or 
Cranberry from different sources were included. These 
showed varietal similarity, with slight strain differences 
mainly in size of seeds. Those of Horticultural Pole 
were largest, approaching those of Worcester, but the 
shortness of the pods excluded it from that variety. 
Season, about 80 days for the shell beans. A new 
strain called Improved London Horticultural is about 



19 19 19 19 11 



YARD LONG OR CUBAN 
ASPARAGUS 



CLIMBING FRENCH 
CARTER'S RESELECTED 



I 



TENDER POD 



CURRLE'S RUSTPROOF 
BLACK WAX 



GREEN PODDED 
FORCING 



GEORGIA POLE 



SOUTHERN PROLIFIC 



BURPEE'S STRINGLESS 
GREEN POD 



19 19 




GOLDEN HARVEST 
CLUSTER WAX 



WELL'S RED KLDNEY 



HIDATSA RED 




I 



PLENTD7UL 



ABUNDANCE 



SCARLET FLAGEOLET VIOLET FLAGEOLET 

WAX WA X 



EARLY HARVEST WAX 



ADMIRAL TOGO EARLLEST OF ALL WAX 



YOSEMITE MAMMOTH 
WAX 



BURPEE'S SADDLE 
BACK WAX 



GIANT STRINGLESS WAX 



PROLIFIC BLACK WAX 

BUSH 



PENCIL POD BLACK 
WAX 



GERMAN BLACK WAX 



IMPROVED BLACK WAX 
BUSH 



KENTUCKY WONDER 
WAX 



• 10 



MEXICAN RED 



• ••I 

LOW'S CHAMPION CANADIAN WONDER 



19 II •* 19 19 



SURE CROP 
STRINGLESS WAX 



19 id 10 to 10 



CELESTIAL BUSH WAX 



10 M 10 10 to 



PROLIFIC OR IMPROVED 
BLACK WAX 



19 10 10 • t 



BLACK VALENTINE BLACK TURTLE SOUP 



i 



TYPES OF BEAN SEEDS 



(Five-sixths natural size) 



1 1 



REFUGEE (iooo-i) 



EXTRA EARLY REFUGEE 
WAX 



i 



HARDY WAX 



KEENEY'S STRINGLESS 
GREEN REFUGEE 



I ft 



OREGON GIANT 




• 19 



tMf 



VALENTINE WAX BUSH MONT D'OR 



I ft 



EARLY MOHAWK 



TENDERGREEN NEW 
STRINGLESS 



I ft M CI 



ITALIAN POLE 



lf> % 



EXCELSIOR REFUGEE 



ft 



EARLY MOHAWK SEX 
WEEKS 



TENNESSEE WONDER 


SCOTTA 


HODSON WAX 


FULL MEASURE 


• 1 


9 9 


• • 


if,.- 


GRAY SEEDED KENTUCKY 
WONDER 


CUT SHORT OR 
CORNHILL 


NANCY DAVIS CORNFIELD 


MEXICAN PINTO 



% 



V 



CARMINE 
(Old seed) 



BOSTON FAVORITE 



(3 • © I 



CRIMSON BEAUTY WORCESTER POLE 



<J 



RUBY HORTICULTURAL 






v/ 






TEWKSBURY DWARF 
HORTICULTURAL 







HORTICULTURAL BUSH 



in 



GOLDEN CARMINE 
HORTICULTURAL 



HOPKINS RED VALENTINE 



• I 



PINTO 



| 



GOLDEN AGE NEW 
STRINGLESS WAX 



LONGFELLOW STRINGLESS 
GREEN POD 



% % ft 



EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 



BALDWIN WONDER 
WAX 



TYPES OF BEAN SEEDS 



(Five-sixths natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



73 



5 days earlier than the older type and produces pods 
which are narrower and average one inch longer. 

Plant large grower, vigorous, branches wholly green; foliage 
abundant, dark green, leaflets medium in size, long pointed, flat, 
smooth surface. Flowers pink. 

Pods dark green when in snap stage, but turn yellowish green 
splashed with purplish to carmine red in green shell stage. Quality 
fair; stringless, nearly fiberless but not very fleshy. Size moderately 
long, very broad and rather slender (6-7 x 5'$- S 4 x 3 •.-'_• I , contain- 
ing 5-7 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross-section, straight to 
slightly creasebacked, straight to slightly curved, constricted, 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and truncate on the end. 
Spur long, slender and curved to assume a perpendicular to the pod. 
Suture, placental is flat to slightly indented and carpellary, acute 
to moderately obtuse. 

Seeds large, 1.5 x 1.0 x. 85 cm. (50-60 per oz.); very broad 
oval, exceedingly plump, broad oval in cross-section; ends uniformly 
but abruptly rounded. Hilum medium, flat to slightly protuberant. 
Color light buff (pale pinkish buff to capucine buff) under color, 
sparingly splashed and streaked with dark red (ox-blood red) over 
entire surface and marked with a moderately wide, deep orange (zinc 
orange eye-ring. 

^Iottled Cranberry. Refs. 3, 97, 98. This old 
variety, known to Martens in 1860, was also described 
by Burr in 1863 and was undoubtedly known in both 
Germany and America before these dates. The strikingly 
colored beans, half red and half white, command atten- 
tion for the variety. It has been quite widely distributed 
under various names but has too few advantages to 
displace established kinds. 

Plant rather low, poor-climbing, leaflets broadly ovate, 
almost triangular, rather short-pointed. Flowers white. Pods 
short, 4 to 5 inches long, broad, slightly flattened, tender and edible 
in early stages; but soon stringy and fibrous. Seeds about 4, about 
J 2 inch long, decidedly more than half as wide, very plump, very 
broad oblong laterally, and oval or ovate on edge view, half about 
eye and toward one end dark crimson, remainder of bean white, 
more or less striped and spotted with red, the amount and distribu- 
tion of white and colored portions varying considerably. 

Red Cranberry Pole. Refs. 12, 13, 48, 63, 91, 97, 

98. Syns. Arlington Red Cranberry, Boston Market 
Pole, Cardinal, Horticultural Pole, Medium Imperial, 
Pearl. This is one of the oldest American varieties. 
It was listed by Thorburn in 1822 and was possibly 
one of the beans planted before 1612 by the Indians 
of Maine among their corn, as mentioned by Leo- 
carbot. 1 Josselyn - includes red beans among the 
many grown in America before 1670. Growth among 
the corn would indicate climbing types, and Red Cran- 
berry Pole was such a bean, suitable for growth in the 
North. This bean was described by Burr as one of the 
most widely cultivated and most useful beans in this 
country; but as grown at this Station in 1882 and 1883 
it was inferior, both in earliness and productivity, to 
many other pole beans. 

Boston Market Pole Cranberry was considered 
identical with Red Cranberry in early tests at this 
Station, which opinion others have followed. A study 
of numerical data given show that Boston Market, in 
both years tested, was two weeks earlier for green shell 
beans and very much more productive. Arlington Red 
Cranberry, introduced about 1885, probably by Farqu- 



har, was a selection from Red Cranberry and differed 
from it in wider, flatter, longer-pointed, and stringless 
pods. 

Plants slow in starting, but later climbing well, large, heavy- 
stemmed, much branched; foliage moderately abundant, leaflets 
large, broad-obovate, almost triangular, taper-pointed, slightly 
crumpled, smooth-surfaced. Flowers pink. Pods uniform, 5 inches 
long or more, almost straight, with short -rounded ends and short, 
central tips, flat but soon swollen by beans, smooth-surfaced, brittle, 
soon somewhat stringy, broad, almost fiberless, green with purplish 
shading, on sutures. Seeds 7 or 8, crowded in pod, short, very broad 
oval, fairly plump, with a short-rounded end, rarely truncate, very 
dark red or brownish crimson. 

DWARF VARIETIES 

Boston Favorite. Refs. 48, 59, 80, 91, 96. Syns. 
Breck's Dwarf Horticultural, Goddard, Godding Dwarf, 
Red Podded Dwarf Horticultural. Boston Favorite, 
perhaps better known as Goddard, was grown about 
Boston for some time before 1885, when it was intro- 
duced by the Aaron Low Seed Company and by Rawson 
under the name given by Gregory, as Red-podded Dwarf 
Horticultural, and probably by others. It soon became 
very popular, and is still sold by many seedsmen in the 
East. Although rather late, it picks over a long season 
and is very productive. The spreading, runner-forming 
habit of the plants and the too frequent production of 
short pods is corrected in strains known as Improved 
Goddard (Ferry, 1897) and Crimson Beauty. 

Plant a very large, spreading bush, open, rather sprawling, 
with some runners; leaflets small, dark green. Flowers blush pink. 
Pods 5 to 6 } 2 inches long, 5 to 6 seeded, abundantly splashed with 
red, smooth, broad, flat, cross-section ovate-acuminate, straight, 
regular, end with tip, spur short, slender, rigid centered. Seed 
large, long, oval, flat, ends rounded, streaked or patterned rather 
than speckled with crimson. 

Crimson Beauty. Refs. 48, 91. Ford announced 
Crimson Beauty for trial in 1895 and distributed it 
regularly the next year. According to Tracy, Ford 
credits origination of the variety to E. D. Gibson, Ash- 
burnham, Mass., as a cross between Boston Favorite 
and a wax-podded bean. 

Plant habits those of Improved Goddard, otherwise very 
similar to Boston Favorite with green-shell pods (later yellow) more 
extensively marked crimson, straighter and more slender; beans 
smaller and rather more plump. 

Dwarf Horticultural. Refs. 10, 13, 15, 28, 29, 

35, 36, 41, 47, 48, 59, 77, 80, 85, 87, 91, 96. Syns. 
Carmine Podded Horticultural, Dwarf Wrens Egg, 
Early Carmine Podded, Intermediate Horticultural, 
Ruby Horticultural, Speckled Cranberry Bush. Under 
various names, of which Dwarf Cranberry or Dwarf 
Speckled Cranberry were probably earliest in America, 
this bean has a long history extending over 150 years 
in Europe and over a century in the United States. It 
is credited by some to Italy, where beans of this type, 
both dwarf and pole, are very popular. From all avail- 
able descriptions, Mawe's Spotted Amber, or Sparrow's 
Egg, Speckled Cranberry, Dwarf Horticultural, and Ruby 
Horticultural had or have seeds of typical horticultural 
shape and color, short-ovate, slightly flattened sidewise, 



' Leocarbot His. Nouv. France. 835. 
2 Josselyn J. Voy. 59. 1865. 



1612. 



74 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



with pinkish-flesh background shaded buff, with spots, 
dashes, and curved streaks or bands, usually interrupted, 
of dark purplish crimson, base color darkening with age 
to light, then dark brown, and markings to purplish 
maroon, then dark maroon. Seeds of Burr's Dwarf 
Horticultural, the newer type, were one-sixth larger than 
those of Dwarf Cranberry; and the better strains of 
Ruby Horticultural are about as much larger than those 
of the old Dwarf Horticultural, averaging now about 50 
to the ounce. Dwarf Horticultural is an early strain, 
60 days for shell beans, about 10 days earlier than 
French Horticultural, the pods are also less highly 
colored and shorter. 

Pods borne both above and below foliage; color light green 
in snap stage, changing to white and splashed with carmine in the 
green shell stage. Quality fair; rather tough, stringless, little or no 
fiber, but rather coarse in texture. Si2e medium long, broad, and 
quite plump i5 5 ' _• x ■" ' s :i . l x '■'■ , s - ; 7 6 inches), containing 4-6 seeds 
per pod. Shape flattened, ovate in cross-section, nearly straight but 
occasionally slightly curved, straight backed, regular, crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and rounded at the end. Spur 
short, thick and straight. Suture, placental is slightly indented 
and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.35 x .9 x .7 cm. (60-65 per oz.); oval 
to short-oblong, plump; very abruptly rounded ends, occasionally 
truncate. Hilum medium, flat. Color deep buff (pinkish buff) 
which later changes to light brown, streaked and spotted irregularly 
over the entire surface with very dark red (ox-blood red to maroon) ; 
narrow, medium brown eye-ring. 

Firebrand. The origin of this variety is unknown. 
It was offered by Schell as a wonderful new bean deriving 
its name from its color. It could well be a development 
of Improved Goddard or Crimson Beauty crossed with 
a wax-podded variety. 

Plant large, foliage abundant, leaflets rounder than those of 
Crimson Beauty, more crumpled, heavy veined, thick. Flowers 
phlox pink. 

Pod yellow, faint streaks appear early on the long pods, later 
beautifully marked carmine; they are fleshy, practically stringless; 
and contain seeds which are very large, often ? 4 inch or more long, 
broad, flattened, curved kidney-shape, with longitudinal, curved 
" zebra " markings raying out from the eye, and frequently with 
one band extending over dorsum, or crest, of bean. 

French Horticultural. This is a rather distinct 
selection from Dwarf Horticultural which has gradually 
replaced other similar varieties. The pods are larger, 
6 to 7 inches long, flat, round at green shell stage, 
straight to slightly curved, dark green color turning 
greenish yellow and heavily splashed or speckled with 
bright red. The plants have a tendency to throw out 
short runners, but it is not a true climber. The strain 
grown at Geneva produced plants and pods very similar 
to Tewksbury Dwarf Horticultural, a popular sort in 
Massachusetts. 

Marblehead Horticultural. Refs. 16, 36, 48, 61, 

87, 91. This variety was introduced in 1882, after a 
year's trial by Gregory, who said its origin was unknown, 
but later credited to a Mr. Dodge, Beverly, Mass. 

Plant similar to Ruby Horticultural, earlier if anything; 
taller, more open, more erect, runnerless; pods not as wide, darker 
in color, marked purplish, very fibrous; seeds often truncate at end 
and with brown rather than reddish markings. 

Pottawottomie. Refs. 13. The name evidently 
refers to an Indian bean described by Burr. The beans 



were well flavored, equal to horticulturals for green 
shell beans, and very late. 

Plant very strong and vigorous, with large, luxuriant foliage 
and flesh white flowers. Pods and seeds apparently very similar 
to those of Goddard, former 6 inches long, green, then mottled and 
streaked lively rose red on cream, the markings becoming purplish 
at maturity, very tough and stringy: the seeds 5, rarely 6, light 
creamy pink, streaked and spotted red or reddish brown, duller and 
darker with age, reaching cinnamon brown, kidney-shaped, 3 4 inch 
long, half as wide. 

Red Speckled. Refs. 47, 93, 94. This is the fore- 
runner to Boston Favorite and, according to Burr ( 1863 ), 
had been grown in American gardens for over two 
centuries. In its improved form or successor, Boston 
Favorite or Goddard, it is still extensively grown. The 
original variety has been long cultivated and highly 
esteemed in England and France and is also well known 
in Germany. According to Wing, seeds from Venezuela, 
grown here in 1884, produced Red Speckled; so the 
variety may have an even longer American history. 
The pods were of only medium quality as snaps, but the 
beans green or dry were excellent. As grown here in 
1883, it was quite late and only moderately productive. 

Rustproof Intermediate Horticultural. Syn. 
Tewksbury. This variety bears several quite different 
names, but according to Edgar Gregory all strains came 
originally from one source, so we include all under the 
one first listed. It is said to have originated with Mr. 
Chandler, Tewksbury, Mass., or he at least accumulated 
stock of it for sale. The name French, or Tewksbury, 
is quite intimately associated with one group of synonyms 
which may have been the name of an earlier grower. 
Mr. Gregory considered it the best of the numerous 
Dwarf Horticulturals, but until lately it has not been 
as popular as the Ruby strain. It is very productive, 
but late and useful mainly for green-shell beans. 

Plant tall, 1 ' 2 ft., erect, but with many short runners; 
foliage medium green, rough with large leaflets broad at base and 
tapering evenly to sharp point (Tewksbury has leaflets duller, 
darker green, decidedly smaller, more noticeably pointed), flowers 
white, cream or blushed, according to age and strain, those of 
Tewksbury lighter; pods long, 6'4 to 7 inches, or more, straight, 
more pointed than rounded at ends, with long, slender, straight 
tips, beautifully marked with carmine and very attractive, but 
soon rather stringy and tough; seeds larger than any except best 
strains of Ruby, inclined to curve more on dorsum, making them 
appear broader, with markings more in patches, occasionally large, 
than in bands and dashes. 

THE FIELD BEANS 
Field beans (edible dry beans) belong botanically 
with the varieties mentioned in preceding sections, 
viz., pole garden beans, dwarf garden beans, and horti- 
cultural shell beans. It can rightly be said that the 
group of varieties represented here are the principal 
beans of commerce. They are the varieties producing 
the dry edible bean, a basic food found in the markets 
of cities on every continent. There are 55 varieties 
mentioned in this section and it might be assumed, 
since dry beans are grown over so wide a territory and 
since their value measured in monetary terms is so 
great, that the number of varieties to be described would 
be much greater. Hardenburg [Bean Culture, 




PERRY MARROW 



(Natural size) 



CARPENTERIA POLE 

LIMA 



) I 



SMALL WHITE POLE LIMA 



BURPEE'S BUSH LIMA 




BROAD WINDSOR 



I 






KING OF THE GARDEN 
POLE LIMA 






EXTRA EARLY SMALL BUSH 
LIMA 



} 



FORDHOOK BUSH LIMA 



| 






AZTEC OR MEXICAN LIMA SUNNYBROOK POLE LIMA 



WILLOW LEAF POLE LIMA JACKSON WONDER BUSH 

LIMA 



IDEAL POLE LIMA 



DWARF SLEVA LIMA 



SUPERBA BUSH LIMA 



EARLY LEVIATHAN POLE 
LIMA 




IS 



FLORIDA BUTTER POLE 



FAVA 



BROAD MAGAZAN 



TYPES OF BEAN SEEDS 



BURPEE'S GIANT PODDED 
POLE LIMA 






IMPROVED HENDERSON 
BUSH LIMA 






DREER'S POLE 



WHITE DUTCH RUNNER 




I 







BUTTERFLY 



' M *•" * $ 9 



SCARLET RUNNER 



(Five-sixths natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



75 



MacMillan Company) says, " The number (of varie- 
ties which is well known to the trade probably does not 
exceed fifty." 

Because field beans have been grown for centuries 
it would seem as though the varieties or types had been 
rather well tried out and that a selective process con- 
tinued for so long would leave only perfect varieties 
for the farmer of today. However, changes in varieties 
and strains of field beans are in evidence today just as 
in other types of beans. A variety to continue in 
existence over any length of time must measure up to 
certain requirements. In field beans these requirements 
are rather exacting. They may be stated as dwarfness: 
disease resistance; hardiness; development of a large, 
deep root system; erectness of plant to hold pods off 
the ground; and the ability to shed leaves readily in 
the fall, to ripen pods uniformly in a season sufficiently 
short to escape killing frosts, and to produce pods that 
are non-shattering when handled before and during the 
curing process. The seed must show a color such as 
the trade requires, resist splitting during threshing, and 
possess the quality necessary for its use either as a 
soup bean, a stewed bean, a home baked bean, or as a 
commercial baked bean. 

The seeds of field beans are for the most part solid 
colored, white, red, brown, yellow, or black. There are 
a few exceptions, such as Yellow Eye, Soldier Bean, 
China Red Eye, and Jacobs Cattle. The white-seeded 
varieties are preferred in the northern regions or where 
rainfall is abundant during the fall or curing season. 
The colored or mottled types prevail in the more 
temperate or dry land regions. On the markets the 
white-seeded varieties of this group are divided into 
pea. medium, marrow, and kidney beans. This classi- 
fication is based on size and shape of the seeds. Other 
varieties which are grown in large quantities are quoted 
according to the variety name, as Red Kidney and 
Yellow Eye. 

Arikara Yellow. Long before the white man 
visited North Dakota the Mandan, Hidatsa, and 
Arikara Indians had a highly developed type of agricul- 
ture along the Missouri River. Beans, corn, and squash 
formed the foundation of their food crops and were 
grown in abundance, carefully nurtured during the short 
dry summers and dried and stored for use in winter. 
Oscar H. Will came to North Dakota in 1881 where he 
devoted himself to the improvement of horticulture 
and agriculture in the Northwest. He began his seed 
business in 1882 and from the start saw the need to 
search out varieties that were suitable to growing 
conditions in the new country. Two varieties of beans 
had proved their value to the Indians. These were first 
listed in an early catalog of Will's as Yellow Indian and 
Red Indian. Later they were named Arikara and 
Hidatsa, after two of the leading Indian tribes of the 
Ft. Berthold region. 

Arikara is exceedingly like Marten's oblongus 
lutens. is hardy, drought resistant, and an excellent 
baking bean. The pods are much like those of Burbank 
Navy but larger; also somewhat like pods of White 



Marrow, but slightly narrower, less constricted, and with 
margin not wavy. 

Plant dwarf, 18 inches tall, very erect and narrow with side- 
wheelers (runners). Foliage very scanty, medium green; leaf 
surface crumpled, rough, heavy veined and thick. Flowers white 
to cream. 

Pods borne mostly below foliage; also to some extent in the 
lower leaf axils of runners; light brownish yellow in color. Quality 
poor; tough, stringy, fibrous and coarse in texture. Size medium 
short, quite broad and rather slender (4-^1' 2 x J2 x ?8 " n ")' con " 
taining 4—5 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross-section, mod- 
erately curved, slightly creasebacked, placental surface somewhat 
constricted, not crowded, moderately smooth, filled to the tip and 
edge, and rounded at the end. Spur short, slender and curved. 
Suture, placental is slightly indented and carpellary, moderately 
acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.4 x .75 x .45 cm. (75 per oz.), medium short, 
broad reniform, long oval thru cross-section, rather flattened; ends 
rounded to occasionally truncate. Hilum medium, flat to slightly 
indented. Color golden brown (yellow ocher to ochraceous-tawny) 
over the entire surface and marked with a darker vein-like under 
pattern; narrow, reddish-brown eye-ring present in all instances. 

Aroostook. Refs. 48, 84, 85, 89, 91. Geo. W. P. 
Jerrard introduced this variety in 1885. In the trials 
at Geneva in 1885 and 1891 it was found to be early 
with good yield. In many ways plant and pods resemble 
those of Yellow Six Weeks, but with darker foliage, 
smaller pods, and whiter seeds. 

Plant of medium size, generally without runners, erect ; stocky, 
with rather heavy green stems; leaflets of medium size, medium 
green, roughened. Flowers white. Pods 5 1 2 inches long, rather 
slender, light green, flat, slightly curved, moderately constricted, 
with long curved tip. Seeds usually 6, small, oblong, truncate, or 
rounded at ends, white. 

Australian Tree. Samuel Wilson Seed Company 
of Mechanicsville, Pa., offered this variety in 1894. The 
seeds were white and intermediate in size and shape 
between Prolific Tree and White Marrowfat, also resem- 
bling in shape seed of Boston Goddard. 

Bayo. Refs. 31, 43, 44. This bean, mostly grown 
in the Sacramento River of California and the South- 
west, is unknown in the East, but was grown in our 
tests and might be useful in breeding work because of 
the long pods crowded with many seeds. The plant, 
however, is rather viny and late but vigorous and very 
productive. Bayo came to California from Chile in 
the first trading vessels previous to 1850, and has been 
a market staple since 1853 in mining camps and for 
Mexican trade in Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and 
Mexico. It is a baking bean, the dry seeds being nearly 
as large as Boston Marrow, but flattened like Lady 
Washington; in color lilac white to pale salmon flesh 
when fresh, changing with age to dark salmon pink, 
with a medium wide, distinct, brown or reddish chocolate 
eye-ring. The word bayo is a Spanish descriptive 
adjective and refers to the bay or chestnut color of the 
seed. 

Bayo Chico is a smaller seeded strain, also from 
Chile, formerly grown in California. Imported or 
Manchurian Bayo is a speckled bean from the Orient, 
not grown in California under that name: but may be 
the Pinto of Aggeler and Musser, which is said to have 
come from Siberia and which differs from the Mexican 
Spotted Red or Pinto commonly grown. 



76 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Blue Pod. Refs. 13, 43, 44, 48, 91. The Blue Pod 
of the East is an old pea bean, described by Burr in 1863 
as the earliest, most prolific field bean grown. In 
New York its production is mostly in the drier wheat- 
growing districts of western New York. A similar 
variety originated independently 40 years later in Cali- 
fornia in 1902, being developed from a plant growing in 
Small White found by Pasqual Scolari in the Lompoc 
Valley. Mr. Scolari retained the stock for himself for 
five years, but after 1907 seed was distributed by the 
Southern Pacific Milling Company. It was favorably 
received by growers and has continued to gain in favor, 
especially in Santa Barbara County. Small White is a 
California strain of the Navy or pea bean. Occasional 
plants bearing blue pods identical with the Blue-Pod 
variety are found in fields where Small White are growing. 
The California Blue Pod apparently is a more dwarfed 
and open-growing variety than the older or Eastern 
strain. The pods ripen a week earlier than White Mar- 
row or Pea Beans. 

Plant, semi-dwarf to dwarf, deep green foliage, white flowers. 
Pods five inches long, pale green when young, light yellow later 
with peculiar purplish tinting. Seeds 5 to 6, often squarely or 
angularly compressed, white. Interchangeable with Small White. 

Bonnemain. Refs. 28. This variety was named 
for the originator, M. Bonnemain, Secretary of the 
Etampes Horticultural Society. Although listed in the 
United States about 1889, records as to its growth do not 
seem to be available. It was very much like White Kid- 
ney but with shorter, narrower, almost cylindrical pods, 
and smaller beans. 

Brown Swedish. Refs. 43, 89, 91. Syn. 
Swedish. Immigrants from Sweden settling in the upper 
Mississippi Valley are supposed to have brought with 
them this variety which still persists as a favorite in 
sections of northern Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota. 
The first recognized use by seedsmen seems to have been 
by Northrup, King & Co. about 1890, although the 
produce trade had been familiar with it for some time. 

Plants of two types, one producing round pods and having a 
plant which is erect without runners, thick stemmed, green through- 
out. The plants of the second type producing flat pods, are larger 
in vine and inclined to spread out and send out runner-like branches. 
Whether these represent two distinct strains or whether the varia- 
tion is an inherent character was not evident in our limited trials. 
Flowers pink. 

Pods borne both above and below the foliage, very light 
green in color; quality poor; tough, very stringy and fibrous and 
rather coarse in texture. Size medium short, narrow and plump 
(4-5 x Yt, x ? s inches), containing 4-5 seeds per pod. Shape round; 
oval in cross-section, slightly curved, moderately saddle backed 
slightly constricted, fairly crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and 
edge and rounded to somewhat truncate on the end. Spur long, 
slender and recurved. Suture, placental is slightly rounded and 
carpellary obtuse. 

Seeds small to medium, l.lx.6x.5 cm. (95-100 per oz.), 
oblong-oval, plump; ends rounded to truncate. Hilum medium 
flat. Color light brown (ochraceous-tawny) over entire surface; 
marked with distinct darker brown, narrow eye-ring. 

There is also a so-called flat podded type that is larger in 
vine and which has numerous side wheelers. The flat-podded type 
has seeds and pods much larger and flatter than the round podded 
type which is described above. The smaller, erect type seems to 
be considered the true Brown Swedish. 



Burlingame. Refs. 41, 43, 48, 84, 85. Syns. 
Burlingame Medium, White Medium, White Field, York 
State Medium. This once popular bean of western 
New York originated about 1896 in Genesee County, 
probably with D. G. Burlingame, as a selection from 
White Medium. The latter was grown here in 1884, 
and Burlingame was included in our recent tests. 

In both our tests plants of these two strains were hardly 
distinguishable from those of Navy Pea, quite viny. Pods partic- 
ularly of Burlingame, decidedly short, broad, with a tendency to 
curve slightly thruout and quite abruptly near tip. Seeds rather 
smaller than Navy, and more elongated, pearly white. 

Canada Yellow. Refs. 13, 47, 56, 93, 94. Syns. 
Round American Kidney. Canada Yellow, known for 
nearly a hundred years, was very similar to China Yellow, 
which was reproduced in Sulphur, and was of the same 
utility. It was a midseason bean, maturing much 
faster if sown late; quite productive. 

Pods 5 inches, straight, green when young, yellow at maturity, 
foliage more ample, less tufted, moderately crumpled, deeper green. 
Flowers lilac. Seeds larger, ovate to sub-cylindrical, rather than 
short-ovate approaching spherical, deeper colored with a shade of 
drab changing to nankeen-yellow (Burr) (Irish says with prominent 
brownish markings), and with a reddish brown line around the 
hilum. 

Canadian Wonder. Refs. 10, 15, 16, 33, 41, 47, 

48, 61, 63, 66, 80, 81, 91, 97, 98. Syns. Red Canada, 
Rose, Summer's Canadian Wonder. The history of 
Canadian Wonder is uncertain; but it is undoubtedly 
of Canadian origin, some time previous to 1873, when 
mention of it was made in an English periodical. 
Gregory listed the Rose Bean in 1882, seed of which was 
secured and grown at Geneva. Tillinghast, in 1884, 
carried the variety as Canadian Wonder or New Rose. 
In the American catalog of Carters Seeds mention is 
made of the great popularity of the variety in England 
and Carter claims to have been one of the first to make 
the merits of this variety known there. Its resemblance 
to Red Kidney would lead one to search for a clew as to 
a relationship but nothing has been unearthed. 

So far as American uses are concerned, Canadian 
Wonder is chiefly used as a dry shell bean. In England, 
Australia, New Zealand, and to some extent on the 
continent the variety is grown as a snap pod or forcing 
bean. If picked early the pods are of good quality and 
when picked at that stage will be as large as most green 
pod varieties which have reached full size. In season 
late. It has a longer and more curved pod than Red 
Kidney and also a larger plant and is much later in 
season, generally appearing as a larger type of Red 
Kidney. It is also similar to Prolific Pickler or Gumkler 
(of German origin), differing slightly in the color of seed 
and with straighter pods. These two varieties probably 
produce the largest pods (thickest) of any of our dwarf 
bush beans. 

Plant very large, 15 to 20 inches tall with spread of from 15-18 
inches; erect, very upright habit of growth, compact, bushy, runner- 
less; extremely vigorous, very hardy, heavily productive, long in 
bearing; stem very stout, round, strongly ridged above; branches 
few, green thruout. Foliage abundant, dark green, somewhat rough 
surface but not wrinkled, thick; leaflets large, 5 '4 inches long by 
3'_. inches wide, appear as comparatively narrow, greatest width 



WHITE SEEDED 
REFUGEE WAX 



1 ♦ ft I 



CHINA RED EYE 



SOLDIER 



' rv ; 



FARIBAULT KIDNEY WAX 



^ G 



GRENELL'S RUSTPROOF 
DWARF WAX 



M i « ? & 10 # I 



GOLDEN WAX 



IMPROVED GOLDEN 
WAX 



GRENELL'S IMPROVED 
GOLDEN WAX 



GOLDEN WAX 
told style) 



FARQUHAR'S RUSTLESS 
GOLDEN WAX 



i ♦ J 9 y( M 



GRENELL'S IMPROVED 

RUST PROOF GOLDEN 

WAX 



IMPROVED DWARF 
GOLDEN WAX 



GOLDEN RUST-PROOF 
WAX 



DWARF GOLDEN WAX 



4 



IMPROVED RUSTPROOF 
GOLDEN WAX 



GOLDEN BUTTER WAX 
BUSH 



J 9 *> • * * 



JACOB'S CATTLE 



BEAUTIFUL BEAN 



DETROIT WAX 



KEENEY'S RUSTLESS 
GOLDEN WAX 



IMPROVED GOLDEN 
WAX BUSH 



FELTHAM PROLIFIC 
STATE 



s> 4 ID 3 



WARDWELL'S KIDNEY 
WAX 



* Y 



GREEN GEM 



GOLDEN EYED WAX 



I r 


( 4 
1 


< | 


! • 


i 


WHITE WAX DWARF 


FAIRFIELD WONDER 
WAX 


BEST YET WAX 


BRITTLE WAX 


ROUND POD KIDNEY 
WAX 


1 J 


1 

r 


■' i 


■f 
C 
1 


4 « 


IMPROVED BUTTER WAX 
BUSH 


BURPEE'S NEW KIDNEY 
WAX 


STRINGLESS 
KING OF THE WAX 


STRINGLESS KIDNEY 
WAX 


MAGPIE 










(Five-sixths natural size) 



TYPES OF BEAN SEEDS 



WHITE LENTAL 






BURLINGAME MEDIUM 
FIELD 















f 


' 










BURBANK NAVY 


BOSTON WHITE 
BAKING 


IMPROVED ROBUST 


BOSTON NAVY 








( 


LARGE WHITE 
MARROW 


LAZY WIFE POLE 


BOSTON MARROW 


PERRY MARROW 



( 






NOVA SCOTIA MARROW 






WHITE SEEDED 
GREENPOD 






BURGERS GREENPOD 






\ 



McCASLAN POLE GOLDEN CLUSTER WAX 



c 



f 






WHITE WAX BUSH 






ROYAL WHITE KIDNEY 



( 






| 






DAVIS WAX 









MARVELLOUS 



IMPERIAL WHITE WONDER OF FRANCE 



IMPERIAL YELLOW EYE IMPROVED YELLOW EYE YELLOW EYE 



GREEN SEEDED DWARF 
FRENCH 



U ) « '» * 



STATE OF MAINE 
IMPROVED YELLOW EYE 



( ( 



DUTCH CASE KND7E GIANT SWORD POLE CRYSTAL WHITE WAX SOUTHERN CORNFIELD WHITE CREASE-BACK 






FORDHOOK FAVORITE WHITE KIDNEY 

(pure line i 



( U CI 



SULPHUR 



( 



PINK EYE 



TYPES OF BEAN SEEDS 



i.Five-sixths natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



77 



well above base, tapering evenly to tips without marked points. 
Flowers lilac. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; poor quality, 
fairly tough, stringy and very fibrous — somewhat more desirable 
from these standpoints when extremely young. Size long, broad 
and medium slender i 5-6 x J •-•' „ x 3 s inches ), containing 5-6 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, long, ovate thru cross-section, very slightly 
curved, straight backed, regular not crowded, fairly smooth, filled 
to the tip and edge and rounded to slightly tapering on the end. 
Spur long, medium slender and slightly curved. Suture, placental is 
flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 1.7x.8x.5 cm. (45-50 per oz.); long reniform, 
flattened: ends usually uniformly rounded but occasionally truncate. 
Hilum small, flattened. Color shining dark red ' ox-blood red! 
shading into a slightly darker tinge on the hilar surface, marked 
with a narrow, inconspicuous, dark, brownish-maroon eye-ring. 

Chartres. Refs. 47, 93, 94, 98. Chartres appears 
to have been grown in America only experimentally, 
from French seed. Although Wing called it strictly 
dwarf, other authorities agree in making it trailing in 
habit, with many runners from 2 to 4 feet long, which, 
however, cling poorly to poles. Therefore, it is nearly 
always grown as a field bean. The green pods could be 
eaten very early as snaps, but its principal use was for 
dry shelling. In our tests it was rather later than White 
Marrow, and unproductive. 

Pods 3} 2 to 4 ! o inches long, just under to just over } o inch 
wide, curved with a slender, straight tip. Seeds same in length as 
pods, ' 4 inch or more in width, and more than half as thick, with 
truncate ends making an almost rectangular rather flat bean about 
the size of Boston Marrow, deep wine red in color, with almost 
black eye-ring. 

China Red Eye. Refs. 9, 13, 15, 27, 29, 41, 45, 
47, 48, 49, 59, 63, 80, 91, 96. Syns. China, Chinese Date, 
Early China, Early China Red Eye, Red Eye, Two 
Colored China Dwarf. This old variety, grown in 
America for at least a century and a quarter, is of un- 
known origin. French and German authorities say it 
came from America, Jarvis believed it of European 
origin, and the name together with Savi's reference 
indicate a Chinese source. It was once very widely 
grown, at first as a garden bean and later for field cul- 
ture. It is now grown only sparingly as a field bean, 
being of too poor quality for snaps or green shell purposes 
and will undoubtedly soon disappear. More than 40 
American seedsmen listed it in 1907, but only 4 in 1921. 

Plant dwarf, erect, compact, runnerless, hardy, productive, 
and moderately early; with leaflets medium to large, broad, short - 
taperpointed tips, dark to medium green, thin, crumpled. Flowers 
white. Pods long (4J4— 5} - inches;, rather slender, oval, usually 
straight, constricted, with very long, slender tips, whitish green 
changing to light yellow before maturing. 

Seeds intermediate in size between pea and marrow beans, 
about 10 to the ounce, oblong with unequal, abruptly rounded ends, 
nearly circular in cross-sections, sides almost straight but gently 
tapering between large and small ends, white with oval or irregular 
margin, sometimes nearly " butterfly-shaped " pinkish red to dark 
red area about hilum, often extending as broad line partly over 
smaller end of bean; not over one-fourth or one-third area, tho 
formerly said to cover nearly half surface. 

Chilean Field. Refs. 13, 48, 91. This bean is 
evidently a strain of the Chilean variety Coscarron 
medio, brought from Chile as Lady Washington. 

Dakota Soup. Refs. 84, 85. From the only record 



we find of this bean, it was grown at the Michigan Station 
in 1890 from seeds sent by Maule. 

Plant small, compact bush, bearing small straight pods 2 to 
2J-4 inches long, with small, round dark yellow peas; early and 
moderately productive. 

Day's Leafless Medium. Refs. 91. This variety 
was first offered by E. F. Dibble of Honeoye Falls, N. Y., 
in 1895, who had obtained the stock from the originator, 
Wm. H. Day. In general characteristics it was heavily 
productive, plant very spreading with many runners. 
Flowers white. The seeds were intermediate between the 
large size known as marrow and the small seeds known as 
pea beans. Seed indistinguishable from those of Burlin- 
game, both selling as York State Medium. 

Dwarf Rice. Refs. 13, 47, 56, 93, 94. This old 
German variety with very small seeds was known to 
Burr in 1863, to Irish in 1901, and was grown at this 
Station under its German synonym in 1884. 

Plant semi-dwarf, 2 feet tall, with light green, " varnished " 
foliage and white flowers. Pods very small, 3 inches long by 2 5- 
inch wide containing 6 very small seeds, noticeably rice-like in 
appearance and quite irregular in shape, sometimes oblong or ovoid, 
often abruptly shortened 'j a inch long by 1 4 inch wide. The young 
pods were quite tender, ready as snaps in about 10 weeks. The dry 
seeds were rather like rice in consistency, with a peculiar brittle 
texture liked by some, not by others. 

Extra Early Six Weeks. This bean, often known 
as Drop Leaf, was grown in the East for some years 
before 1892. It was said to be more productive than 
Navy Pea, much earlier, and entirely rust -proof. 

Plants 1 to 1 ] 4 feet tall, compact; pods 5 to 6 inches long, 
}-2 inch wide, slender, straight or slightly curved, green; seeds 4 to 
6, slightly oblong, inclining to kidney-shape, rather flat, slightly 
larger than those of Navy, white with rich brown eye-ring. 

French White. Refs. 48, 91. Peter Delphy, a 
grower at Vista, Calif., secured seed of this strain from 
France in 1902. It was later identified, presumably by 
the seeds alone, as the French variety Quatre-a-Quatre 
(Four-to-Four, from pods regularly in two-pair clusters). 
But as this is a pole bean, the new bean imported by 
Mr. Delphy seems more likely to be a strain of Nain 
blanc Quarantain, which is very close to our Vineless 
Marrow. So far as known, French White is grown 
only in California, where the beans are marketed with 
those of Lady Washington, although the seeds are more 
plump and with obscure grayish areas on the sides. 
They serve well for baking but are said to become too 
soft in canning. 

Plants taller than those of Lady Washington, more vigorous 
and more erect, and the leaflets are smoother and slightly smaller; 
flowers appear earlier and continue longer; young pods are edible, 
being nearly stringless. 

Great Northern. Refs. 43, 89, 91. This bean 
came into public notice about 1907, when Will distributed 
seed received from the Mandan Indians by whom it had 
been long grown. Seed of it has been found buried in 
mounds known to be centuries old. Where grown with 
Navy bean it has proved hardier, earlier, and more pro- 
ductive. Great Northern has proved to be well adapted 
to growth in the irrigated sections of Montana. 

The seeds are similar to enlarged, rather lengthened Navy 
beans, or intermediate in size and shape between Navy and White 



78 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Kidney, produced in pods 3 3 4 to 4'» inches long, rather narrow, 
regularly curved, slightly constricted, blunt ended, with short, 
slender, curved tip. The plants are l 1 ^ to ljo feet tall, with many 
slender branches and vines sometimes reaching 5 feet, forming straw 
which live stock readily eats. 

Ground Bird. Corn, beans, and squashes were 
the principal vegetable foods of the Iroquois Indians of 
New York. Many varieties of beans have been pre- 
served by the Indians and are still cultivated and used 
by them as food plants. Several of these varieties were 
secured from Chief Walter Kennedy of the Alleghany 
Reservation at Salamanca, N. Y., and have been grown 
at Geneva. In color of seed they are quite unlike any 
of the dwarf varieties now commonly grown. They 
proved to be hardy in growth and very productive. 
The origin of these types is unknown, but they were 
undoubtedly grown in pre-Columbian times by the 
Indians and perhaps found their way northward from 
South American countries. New York State Museum 
Bulletin 144, 1910, " Iroquois Uses of Maize and other 
Food Plants," by Arthur C. Parker, contains much 
interesting information on the early food plants of the 
region. The following sentences are quoted, " Beans 
next to corn were regarded as a favorite food and 
quantities are still eaten. The Iroquois have 10 or 
more varieties of beans which they claim are ancient 
species which have long been cultivated." 

Plant dwarf, 12-14 inches tall, spread 15-18 inches, drooping, 
semi-trailing. Stem medium size, round near base, slightly angular 
on upper portion, moderately smooth, occasionally slightly ridged. 
Internodes short. Branches medium number, both basal and 
medial in position. Foliage abundant, moderately dark, glossy 
green; wrinkled, pubescence medium. Leaflets moderately small, 
broad i3 x 4 inches). Stipules medium, tips short, abruptly pointed. 
Tendrils simple, medium, slightly curled, permanent. Flowers 
(phlox purple) begin at 5th node, single or in pairs. Peduncle 
short, slender. 

Pods borne intermediate and above the foliage; green (Kil- 
dare green), occasionally showing fine flecking with deep crimson 
and purple similar to markings on horticultural beans. Quality 
poor, moderately brittle, stringy, coarse and tough. Moderately 
short, medium width, slender (4-5 x ys x tV - A inches) containing 
5-6 seeds per pod. Flat, long oval in cross-section, straight, 
straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip 
and edge and rounded to blunt on the end. Spur short, slender, 
straight to slightly curved. Suture, placental flattened and carpel- 
lary. acute. 

Seeds small, 1.1 x .75 x .6 cm. (106 per oz.); shape short oval, 
plump, cross-section moderately broad oval, ends abruptly rounded. 
Hilum flat, medium. Color dull white, sparsely speckled with 
greenish gray (dark glaucous-gray), irregular shaped dots over the 
entire surface and marked with a narrow, buff (cinnamon-buff) 
colored eye-ring. 

Ilatt New. Refs. 84, 85. Jack Hatt of Argentine, 
Mich., selected and introduced three varieties shortly 
before 1890. The lot tested at Geneva produced plants 
and seeds exceedingly like French Flageolet. 

Plants tall, growing better with support; foliage dark green; 
leaflets of medium size; pods flat, 4 to 6 inches long, decidedly 
curved; beans large, " half-round ", white. 

Hidatsa Red. Syn. Red Indian. The history and 
uses of this native bean are the same as those of Arikara 
Yellow, the principal difference being in the seeds, those 
of Hidatsa Red being a rich glossy wine red or dark 



purplish crimson as compared to the yellow seeds of 
Arikara. Oscar Will introduced Hidatsa as Red Indian, 
later renaming it for one of the Mandan Indian tribes. 
The Red is said to be a better cropper than the Yellow, 
but the beans are not quite so good in flavor. The dried 
beans of Hidatsa Red are indistinguishable from those 
of Red Mexican. Both have white flowers, but plants 
of Hidatsa are early, practically runnerless, have small 
leaflets, and short pods. Red Mexican plants are late, 
viny, with heavier foliage, and longer pods. 

Pods borne mostly below foliage; medium green in color; 
quality poor, stringy, fibrous, tough and coarse in texture. Size 
short, quite broad and plump (3 J £-4 x } i x 3 s inches), containing 
4-5 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oval in cross-section, straight to 
slightly curved, straight backed, constricted, not crowded, rather 
wrinkled, filled to the tip and edge and rounded to somewhat trun- 
cate at the end. Spur short, slender and recurved. Suture, 
placental is flattened and carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds small, 1.2 x .8 x .5 cm. (110-115 per oz.); very broad 
oval, almost rectangular, rather flattened, long oval in cross-section; 
ends truncate to abruptly rounded. Hilum medium, flattened to 
slightly indented. Color reddish purple (Corinthian purple to 
bordeaux) over the entire surface but increasing in intensity on the 
hilar and dorsal surface, and marked with a very narrow, black 
eye-ring. 

Hubbardston. The 1922 catalog of Childs first 
carried the description of this new bean which was said 
to be " earlier than Navy Pea or Yellow Eye, fine as a 
dry bean for baking, having a combined flavor of beans 
and peas." Seeds received here in 1922 were larger, 
shorter, and slightly darker than those of Sulphur, 
having a distinct brownish shade. 

Indian Bean. This is another of the old Indian 
varieties. Plants larger than Ground Bird, but more 
erect and with fewer trailing branches. The seeds are 
large and with very individual markings. In the type 
of marking they resemble seed of Jacob's Cattle, but 
the color is darker and the size larger. 

Plant dwarf, 16-18 inches tall, spread in row 12-14 inches; 
erect growth, intermediate between Ground Bird and Red Face 
in branching habit, good vigor, productive. Stem stout, round, 
smooth, slightly ridged above base. Internodes moderately short. 
Foliage medium, medium dull light green; leaf surface moderately 
smooth; moderately thick, medium veined. Leaflets moderately 
large, long, 4J^-4J^ x 2J^— 3 inches. Tip medium, tapering. 
Stipules moderately large, tendrils simple, medium, little curled, 
and permanent. Flowers white, borne in pairs often singly. 

Pods borne both intermediate among the foliage and above; 
moderately dull light green (Chrysolite green). Quality fair; 
brittle, stringless but coarse in texture. Size moderately long, 
broad and slender (6-7 x 3^-rV x J4 - rV inches) containing 5-6 
seeds per pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross-section, straight 
slightly creasebacked, regular, not crowded, filled to the edge 
but not to the tip and rounded at the end. Spur, medium long, 
moderately thick and straight. Suture, placental slightly indented 
and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 1.8 x .9 x .7 cm. (42 per oz.); shape long, sub- 
reniform, cross-section long oval, somewhat flattened. Ends 
rounded, hilum small, flat. Color dull white, spotted and blotched 
on ventral surface with buff (salmon color), dull pink (etruscan 
red) and deep purple (indian purple), the latter color predomi- 
nating. The spots also occur as disk-like markings on the dorsal 
surface, but on the ventral, the coloring is solid with no white 
showing. 

Jacob's Cattle. This bean with such unusual seed 
color is of unknown origin and quite local distribution 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



79 



in Maine, but it may be identical with the Trout bean 
of northwestern Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and 
Vermont of which we have been unable to obtain seed 
or direct references. The latter is probably the German 
bean Forellen. 

Plants very dwarf, less than a foot tall, with foliage like that 
of China Red-eye, and very uniform pods, 4} 2 to 5 inches long, 
slightly but regularly curved and gradually enlarging from neck to 
end, which is rounded with long, slender curved tip from about 
center. Seeds 5, very similar in shape to China Red-eye, about 
1 6 larger, and very distinctly marked. More than half of the sur- 
face centering irregularly about the hilum, often more markedly on 
one side or one end than the other, is covered with a solid, irregularly 
margined blotch of brownish crimson, the remaining surface being 
white upon which are irregularly distributed perfectly round dots 
and spots of the same red. Any irregularity of margin of the spots 
is due to the joining of two or more. 

Lady Washington. Refs. 43, 44, 48, 91. Syns. 
Large White, Chilean Field Pea. The native bean of 
Chile known as Coscarron medio was probably brought 
" around the Horn " at different times, since it was 
grown in the East before 1850 and is still found here 
occasionally. It was taken to California from the East 
about 1851, and was first listed on the markets in 1856, 
but it was little grown until about 1891 when fresh seed 
was probably brought from Chile, Southern California, 
or Mexico. From that time its culture spread rapidly. 
Its chief value is as a soup or baking bean, as it cooks 
soft in canning. Slightly later than pea beans, but fully 
as good if not better in crop, with beans flatter, slightly 
larger, and produced on more viny plants. 

Plants 1 } e to 1 5 g feet tall, with stout, erect stem like that of 
Prolific Tree, but with many trailing runners reaching 3 feet; foliage 
abundant, dark green, thin, smooth; leaflets medium to large, broad, 
rounded, not taper-pointed. Flowers borne very low, white. Pods 
paired or in clusters, 4} 2 to 4 J g inches long, straight, with blunt ends 
and long, slender but rigid tips, nearly } 2 inch wide, oval in section, 
not greatly constricted; seeds about 7, very short, broad oval, rather 
flat, slightly lighter than those of Robust (145 to the ounce). 

Mahogany Red. This uncatalogued variety, oc- 
casionally found in the markets, may be entirely distinct 
from Red Kidney, but its seeds are so similar in shape 
that it must be classed with it. The seeds are rather 
more slender, more markedly kidney -shaped, and much 
darker, approaching with age a rich mahogany red. 
They are inferior in quality to other Red Kidneys, 
especially Geneva and York, with skins of distinctly 
" tough " texture. 

Maine. Refs. 16, 47, 49, 61. Thorburn listed this 
variety in 1890, but it probably was grown much earlier. 
In early descriptions it was said to be valuable both as 
a snap and baking bean. 

Plant small, with few branches; leaflets yellowish green, 
3J2~3?4 inches long, two-thirds as wide, quite smooth, thick. 
Flowers white. Pods very short, 2J2 to 3J2 inches wide, oval in 
cross-section, greatly curved, with long, slender curved tip. Seeds 
nearly or quite one-half inch long, sub-cylindrical or slightly kidney- 
shaped, usually broad at ends, often truncate, snow white, like those 
of Davis Wax, but smaller. 

Maine Frost-proof. A field bean sent to this 
Station in 1885 by Hoskins, and grown one season. 

Plants very dwarf, under a foot tall, prolific; pods loment-like, 
4— 4 ] 2 inches long, recurved, often bent sidewise; seeds more or less 
striped and spotted with gray on a white ground. 



Navy Pea. Refs. 13, 34, 38, 43, 47, 56, 63, 74, 

91, 96, 97, 98. Syns. Banner Leafless, Bismarck Great 
American Soup, Boston Pea, Boston Marrow Pea, 
Boston Navy, Boston Small Pea, California Branch, 
California White Tree, California Wonder, Coscarron 
Chico (Chile), Early Marrowfat Pea, Early Minnesota, 
Electric Tree, Hallock Tree, Haricot rond blanc commun, 
Imperial Prolific, Improved Prolific Tree, Improved 
Tree, Improved White Navy, June Bean, Little Dwarf 
Navy, Marrow Pea, Marrowfat Pea, Mexican Tree, 
Navy, Portland Fancy, Prizewinner, Prolific Tree, Round 
White Princess, Salzer's Tree, Small Navy, Tree, White 
Branching Sugar, White Pea, Wisconsin Tree. 

This very old variety should probably be known as 
Pea-bean, which form was preferred by Burr, our earliest 
American authority on garden vegetables; but Navy has 
now become the market name of a type rather than that 
of a particular variety, so we follow Irish, Tracy, and 
Jarvis in using Navy Pea to separate part of the group 
from a few other pea beans that are clearly distinct, 
like Robust and Snowflake. The first part of the name 
in no way characterizes the variety but merely refers to 
the preference for use at sea of the American Navy for 
beans of this type. 

Beginning with the cultivation by the Indians in 
New York State, the small white pea bean has been the 
most widely grown of the field beans. Selection for higher 
yields and hardier plants was commonly practiced by 
bean growers. Nearly 100 quite distinct names have 
been applied to beans of this type grown in various parts 
of the United States. The many synonyms of the variety, 
of which some have indicated rather distinct types, are 
now interlocked and confused so that little can be done 
to separate them. Of the white-seeded beans used for 
cooking or baking, we have the white marrows, the white 
kidney beans, and a third type made up of the smaller- 
seeded sorts and represented by Great Northern, Lady 
Washington, Robust, Navy Pea, Small White, and York 
State Medium. Navy pea is the principal field variety 
of the United States, requiring about 120 days between 
killing frosts. In addition to its universal use as a home 
baked bean, it is used extensively for the commercial 
canned baked bean. 

Plant dwarf, 14 to 16 inches tall, spread in row of 16 to 18 
inches: with many short runners lying loosely on the ground; very 
vigorous, hardy, heavily productive; rather slender stemmed, much 
branched, green thruout. Foliage very abundant, medium to dark 
green; leaf surface smooth to very slightly rough, thin; leaflets small, 
2} 2 to 3J 4 inches long by 2 to 2} 2 inches wide, widest at ! 4 distance 
from base, lateral leaflets quite one-sided, rounded to stem, tapering 
to short pointed tip. Flowers white. 

Pods borne mostly below foliage; also to some extent in the 
lower leaf axils of runners. Color very light green. Quality poor; 
stringy, very fibrous, tough, but possessing fine texture. Size short, 
narrow and slender (3-4 x ? 8 x ^ inches), containing 6-7 seeds per 
pod. Shape flat in snap stage, but nearly round as a green shell 
bean, broad oval in cross-section, straight backed, slightly curved, 
regular, fairly crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge, and 
rounded at the end. Spurs short, medium slender, and recurved. 
Suture placental is flat and carpellary, somewhat obtuse. 

Seeds small, .9 x .6 x .5 cm. (130 per oz.); oval, quite plump 
to somewhat flattened; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. Hilum 



80 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



small, protuberant. Color white, thru which shows numerous gray, 
vein-like markings over the entire surface. 

Nettle-leaved Canterbury. Refs. 47, 53, 93, 
94. A variety useful in America only as a green-shell or 
dry-shell bean, but which in France was often forced for 
the young green pods. 

Plant with very dark-green, almost black, much wrinkled or 
" puckered " foliage which distinguishes it from all but one or two 
other varieties. 

In most characteristics similar to White Kidney, but only half 
as tall, with rather shorter, more curved pods, and broader, flatter 
beans more like those of Dwarf Caseknife. 

Nova Scotia Marrow. Refs. 43. Syns. Vineless 
Marrow. This variety was a once prominent strain of 
White Marrow which was regarded very favorably for 
a few years in the western New York marrow bean area, 
but which is now rapidly disappearing in favor of more 
disease-resistant kinds. It was named, in this State, 
from its apparent place of origin. Seeds of it, grown in 
Musquidobit Valley, Nova Scotia, were exhibited with- 
out name, at a Provincial Exhibition at Halifax, about 
1910. The similarity of Nova Scotia Marrow to Vine- 
less Marrow in everything except size of beans makes 
the supposition fairly reasonable that the seeds shown 
at the Exhibition were those of Vineless Marrow. This 
variety was quite widely, if not extensively, distributed 
just before 1900 and may easily have reached Nova 
Scotia and the other Maritime Provinces and may have 
been grown in isolated sections until the name was lost. 
These exhibited seeds attracted the attention of Mr. 
" Bat " Saunders, a noted rifle shot, and from a few of 
them he developed a small stock at Paradise, N. S. A 
neighbor, Allison FitzRandolph, improved the stock by 
selecting the largest seeds. Geo. Sanders then grew the 
variety from Randolph's seeds, selecting for his second 
crop seeds from heavy-yielding plants. Through Mr. 
Sanders, Prof. H. H. Whetzel of the New York State 
College of Agriculture learned of the variety, and he and 
other investigators at Ithaca secured seed of it from Mr. 
Randolph through the Nova Scotia College of Agricul- 
ture and the Dominion Experimental Farms. Progeny 
from this seed, grown by Prof. W. H. Burkholder, on 
United States Department of Agriculture plats at Grove- 
land, pleased O. C. Lake, of that village and he imported 
considerable quantities of seed from Nova Scotia, begin- 
ning in 1919, from which he developed a stock to supply 
growers around Groveland. The variety was then 
apparently quite free from disease so that its productivity 
and the large size of the beans made it very popular. 
Seed of Nova Scotia Marrow, however, became so mixed 
with that of other varieties that the disease resistance 
apparently lessened. The dry beans were also found to 
split very readily, so the variety lost popularity almost 
as rapidly as it had gained it. 

Plants about 134 feet tall, erect, rather sparingly branched, 
runnerless; foliage medium to abundant, dark to medium green, 
dull surfaced, roughened or crumpled; leaflets very large, 4?4 to 5 
inches long, almost as broad quite near base and very gently round- 
ing to short, obtuse tips. Flowers white. Pods 4 to 4 3 .| inches long, 
almost straight, with long, almost straight, slender, rigid, central 
tips very broad for length, distinctly constricted between beans, 
green, not usable as snaps. Seeds about 4, large, of Boston Marrow 



shape, oval to very short oval or usually ovate, with short-rounded 
ends, very plump, cotyledons often separated, while slightly veined, 
moderately glossy, often considerably pitted and wrinkled, about 
45 to the ounce. 

Paraguay. This bean came from the Guanaco 
Indians of Paraguay. It produces a bush plant on poorer 
soils, but under the best conditions becomes almost a 
pole bean. It is very productive, in either form, of 
medium sized, white beans of best quality. Burbank 
in 1921 was responsible for its dissemination in this 
country. 

Perry Marrow. Refs. 43, 77. Prof. W. H. Burk- 
holder, working at Cornell University, Ithaca, N. Y., 
made crosses between White Marrow and Wells Red 
Kidney beans, from which several hybrids developed. 
These were carried for several years, with constant selec- 
tion for disease resistance, and several of the best strains 
were grown in quantity at Ithaca and at Perry, N. Y. 
Commercial distribution began about 1922. Some 
attempt was made to keep the strains separate, since 
many of them showed marked differences in many char- 
acters, but the stocks have now become so mixed in 
growers' and seed-sellers' hands that the commercial 
Perry Marrow is often a mixture of strains. 

Pods borne mostly below foliage; also to some extent in the 
lower leaf axils of runners. Very pale light green in color. Quality 
poor; stringy, fibrous, tough and coarse in texture. Size moderately 
long, quite broad and plump (S 1 ^— 6x ?jxjj inches), containing 
4—5 seeds per pod. Shape nearly round, broad oval in cross-section, 
straight to slightly curved, straight backed, somewhat constricted 
both on the placental and lateral surface, fairly smooth, filled to 
the tip and edge and moderately rounded on the end. Spur very 
long, slender and slightly recurved. Suture, placental is flattened 
and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium to large, 1.2 x .8 x .7 cm. (45-50 per oz.l; short 
oval, plump, broad oval in cross-section; ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum small, protuberant. Color shining, glossy white over entire 
surface, marked with a grayish, vein-like under pattern and a narrow, 
indistinct, pale yellowish eye-ring. 

Pilot Navy. This bean was first erroneously called 
Early Pierpont, then Early Dupont or Dupont Navy 
from its discoverer, Wm. H. Dupont, of Minnesota, and 
finally Pilot, " the bean ahead." Will introduced it in 
1913 as a sport from Golden Wax. It is a typical Navy 
in pod and pea, in height of plant and vining habit, but 
earliness and the large broad leaflets separate it from 
Navy Pea. The skin is very thin and cooking quality 
excellent. 

Pink. Refs. 31, 43, 44, 91. Syns. Bayo Medio, 
Ran Caguino, Rosa, Salmon Colored Kidney, Yura Mon. 
We have grown Pink several times in our tests, but it 
has never matured so is out of consideration for eastern 
bean growing sections. It is excelled in popularity for 
California, however, only by the lima, and is also much 
grown in the Southwest and in Mexico. Since it is 
known as the White Man's Bean (Yura Mon) by the 
Mexican Indians, it was probably brought in by the 
Spanish " Conquistadores," or carried overland from 
Chile. Grown in California, it forms a mass of trailing 
vines and is very productive. The dry beans are used as 
baking beans, or in recent times, in the preparation of 
Chile con came. Seed, light salmon pink, with rather 




Ill 



BLACK TURTLE SOUP 




Ml 




BOSTON FAVORITE 



POD TYPES OF FIELD BEANS 



''Natural size) 



IMPROVED EARLY 
RED VALENTINE 









RUSTPROOF 

INTERMEDIATE 

HORTICULTURAL 








RUBY DWARF HORTICULTURAL 



(Natural size 



POD TYPES OF DWARF BEANS 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



81 



obscure light brown eye-ring, which later has a more 
pinkish tinge. In size the seeds are smaller, distinctly 
thinner, and have ends more often truncate than the 
seed of Bayo. 

Pink-eye. This is so nearly a duplicate of White 
Kidney that the same description with minor changes 
applies to either variety. Leaflets are not quite so large; 
the pods are broader, \ • to - ; inch wide, and with coarser 
texture. Seeds are of the same shape but are about one- 
fifth larger and with a small pink or reddish spot or 
oblong, parallel-sided patch at each end of the eye, one 
of which is usually larger and longer than the other. 

Pinto. At least three distinct Pinto beans are 
grown in Colorado and states further South and West, 
and all are hardy and suited for growth on dry land. 
None are early enough or productive enough for growing 
successfully in the East, nor is there any demand for 
beans of this color in our markets. Seeds of Mexican 
Pinto, the bean mostly used to prepare Chile con carne, 
are very much like Great Northern in size, but are some- 
what more plump and without kidney-shaped indenting 
of the hilum. The color is like the seed color of Rhode 
Island Butter pole bean. Seeds of Spotted Mexican are 
like Red Mexican in size and shape but are " calico " 
spotted. The large irregular white areas are distributed 
with areas of dark crimson in proportions varying from 
half and half to solid red color. 

The Siberian, Manchurian, or California Pinto of 
Aggeler and Musser is a smaller, plumper bean, more 
like Burlingame in size and shape, with under color 
of light brown tinted salmon and narrow more or less 
curved streaks of darker brown or mahogany red. 

Plant medium in size, vine semi-trailing, spreading; foliage 
medium to dark green. Flowers white. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage; also to some extent in 
the lower leaf axis of runners; medium light green in color, in later 
stages, cream-colored and rather deeply marked with irregular 
brownish-purple stripes or streaks. Quality poor; tough, stringy, 
fibrous and coarse in texture. Size medium long, quite broad and 
slender, 4?4 to 5 inches long, containing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat, oval in cross-section, moderately curved, straight to occasionally 
slightly creasebacked, constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to 
the tip but not to the edge and abruptly rounded to truncate at 
the end. Spur long, slender and slightly recurved. Suture, pla- 
cental is flat to somewhat indented, and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.3 x .8 x .56 cm. 85-90 per oz.); short, rather 
broad oval occasionally somewhat rhomboidal, long oval thru cross- 
section; ends very abruptly rounded to decidedly truncate. Hilum 
medium, slightly indented. Color pinkish buff ibuff pink), spar- 
ingly blotched over entire surface with medium dark brown ! dresden 
brown and marked with a narrow, deep orange (zinc orange) 
eye-ring. 

Red Face. A variety grown by the Indians as a 
soup bean. In growth habit the plant is erect and free 
from runners, differing in this respect from Ground 
Bird. The color marking while red instead of yellow 
resembles the Molasses Face type of Yellow Eye. 

Plant dwarf, 16-18 inches tall, spread in row 10-12 inches; 
erect growth. Free from short runners characteristic of some 
field beans. Quite vigorous, moderately productive. Stem quite 
stout, slightly ridged, internodes medium; branches few, both 
medial and basal in position. Foliage medium, dull dark green; 
leaf surface moderately smooth, quite heavily veined, medium 
pubescent. Leaflets moderately small, 4— 4j^ inches long by 



2'j-2 3 .i inches wide — tip medium, rather abruptly pointed 
stipules medium, no tendrils present. Flowers white, borne singly 
and in pairs. 

Pods borne intermediate and below the foliage. Color dull 
light green (light grape green). Quality fair; stringless, moderately 
brittle but coarse in texture. Size medium long, broad and moder- 
ately slender (,5—6 x - x \ x fg inches), containing 5-6 seeds per pod. 
Shape oval in snap stage. Broad oval in cross-section, straight, 
slightly creasebacked, regular, smooth, filled to the tip and edge. 
Spur medium short, thick, and straight to slightly recurved. Suture, 
placental is slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds medium 1.3 x 1.0 x .8-.9 cm. (55 per oz.); broad oval, 
moderately short, plump, very broad oval in cross-section; ends 
abruptly rounded. Hilum flat, small. Color dull white on the 
dorsal surface, ends and sides; marked with a large, dark reddish 
purple (bordeaux), regular area over the entire ventral surface. 

Red Kidney. Refs. 16, 21, 35, 43, 44, 47, 48, 61, 
63, 77, 89, 91. Syns. Chilean, Dwarf Green pod, French 
Kidney, Improved Red Kidney, Large Red Kidney, 
Red Turkey. Joint use of the names Red Kidney and 
Burr's Chilean in the Country Gentleman of 1874 
and later references identify these varieties as probably 
the same. This indicates a South American origin for 
Red Kidney, although no date of introduction has been 
found. In the eastern states it was known before 1857. 
As with other field beans, the seed is saved by the indi- 
vidual grower, from home-grown or local stocks. This 
facilitates the development of many strains of Red Kid- 
ney, a few of which are distinct enough to merit notice. 
French Red Kidney is one of the older types, character- 
ized by rather small, dark garnet brown seeds lightened 
with crimson violet; pods long, more slender than in 
most other strains, straight near the stem, but distinctly 
curved at the center. Wells Red Kidney comes from a 
single plant selected by Byron Luce, Marion, N. Y., 
about 1904. The stock was gradually developed and 
came in part into possession of John Q. Wells, Shorts- 
ville, N. Y., for whom it was named and through whom 
this strain became widely distributed. Seed of Wells 
Red Kidney is rather light colored. Other strains 
developed more recently have been named Geneva Red 
Kidney and York Red Kidney. These were developed 
by Prof. W. O. Gloyer from a cross between Wells Red 
and White Kidney beans made at this Station in 1920. 
The seeds are indistinguishable from Wells Red Kidney, 
although the plants are markedly vigorous and show 
much of the White Kidney growth character. 

Red Kidney is widely grown in the Finger Lakes 
District of Central New York, is second in importance 
in Michigan, and is being grown increasingly in the 
coastal regions and internal valleys of northern Cali- 
fornia. From two-thirds to three-fourths of the total 
export trade in dry beans is composed of Red Kidneys 
sent to Cuba, Porto Rico, and other West Indian 
islands. There is also some demand for Red Kidneys 
from the pork and bean trade. It is intermediate in 
season for field beans. The habit of the plant is the 
same as that for White Kidney, the pods differing in 
being straighter at the stem end and somewhat flatter. 

Plant large, 14 to 16 inches tall, with spread of 12 to 14 inches; 
erect, compact, runnerless; vigor good, intermediate in season, 
heavily to moderately productive, thick stemmed, branches few, 
green throughout. Foliage medium in abundance, medium green, 



82 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



leaf surface slightly rough, slightly crumpled, medium veined, thick; 
leaflets large, 5 inches long by 3 '2 inches wide, widest two-fifths the 
distance from base, rounded rather pear-shaped to base, sides long 
straight taper to slender tip. Flowers blush pink. 

Pods borne both above and below foliage; waxy green in color. 
Quality poor: tough, stringy and very fibrous. Size long, fairly 
broad and slender (5-6 x J •_> x -^ inches) containing 4-5 seeds per 
pod. Shape oval to flat, long oval in cross-section, straight, straight 
backed, regular to slightly constricted, fairly crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip and edge and rounded to somewhat tapering at the 
end. Spur long, medium slender, straight and occasionally slightly 
curved. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium to large 1.8 x 1. x .65 cm. (40-60 per oz.), long, 
broad, somewhat reniform, rather flattened, long oval in cross- 
section; ends rounded. Hilum small, flat. Color ranges from pink- 
ish crimson (jasper pink), and reddish brown (hay's russet) to a 
deep mahogany (garnet brown) over the entire body. The varia- 
tion may be within or between strains. 

Rod Marrow. Refs. 43. This variety seems not 
to have been listed in catalogs nor was it described by 
Irish, Tracy, or Jarvis; but price quotations have often 
been noted in market reports and, according to Hickox- 
Rumsey Company of Batavia, N. Y., it has been grown 
near there and northward to Lake Ontario for the last 
35 or 40 years. It was grown to produce a colored bean 
to ship to Porto Rico and Cuba. 

Plant 1 to 1 J g feet tall, spreading, somewhat trailing; foliage 
medium green; leaflets rather larger than those of Large White 
Marrow, smaller than those of Perry Marrow. Flowers lilac. Pods 
of Nova Scotia Marrow type 4'i to 4 3 4 inches long, more than 
1 _> inch wide, straight or slightly curved, ovate in cross-section, 
doubly rounded to blunt at the ends, with rather heavy rigid tips. 
Seeds 5, occasionally 6, about size of Nova Scotia Marrows, not as 
plump, longer, long ovate or oblong with ends unequal in size, often 
truncate; same color as light strains of Red Kidney, but darker and 
less flat than the variety Pink. 

Red Mexican. Refs. 43, 44, 91. Syns. California 
Red, Mexican, Mexican Red, Red, Red Spanish, Rojo, 
Salinas Red. As Red Mexican came from the Indians 
of northern Mexico and is unknown in Chile, it is pos- 
sibly a southern strain of the bean from which Hidatsa 
Red was developed by the Indians of the northern 
Plains. In California it has been known and prized as 
a dry-land crop since 1855. It is said to be indistinguish- 
able from Pink in the field until the seeds begin to color. 
The seed is similar to Hidatsa Red; the flowers white. 

Robust. Refs. 43, 77, 82. Syns. Improved Robust, 
Michigan Improved. Beginning with its cultivation by 
the Indians in New York State, the small white pea bean 
has been the most widely grown of the field beans. 
Selection for high yields and hardier plants was commonly 
practiced by bean growers everywhere that dry shell 
beans were produced. In 1908, Prof. F. A. Spragg of 
Michigan Agricultural College made several selections 
from a large collection of commercial samples of white 
navy beans. These original selections were made from 
plants that stood out as being more resistant to mosaic 
than the majority in the field. Seed of one of these 
selections was increased and introduced to Michigan 
farmers in 1913 and named Robust that same year by 
Professor Spragg. Reselections from the original strain 
were made and one of these was introduced to growers 
in 1918 and another in 1921. The later introduction 
was known as Improved Robust, which however has not 



proved superior in production to the original strain. 
This selection did serve the purpose of establishing again 
a pure supply of seed. 

The Robust bean is now, in the principal pea-bean 
producing sections of the country, especially in Michigan 
and New York, the leading field variety and is fast 
displacing all other strains. It is later than some other 
strains of Navy Pea (Crawford, Hunter, Wonder, or 
Michigan Improved) and rather slow in developing its 
very extensive root system, but when established is able 
to set and mature more pods than any other. The 
leaflets of Robust are usually more wrinkled than those 
of Navy and are drawn in at the edge, so that Robust 
holds its foliage under adverse conditions and continues 
green and vigorous late in the season. 

Pods borne mostly below foliage; also to some extent in the 
lower leaf axils of runners. Color light greenish white. Quality 
poor; stringy, fibrous and tough. Size very short, narrow, and 
slender (3-4 x 7 16 x 5/16 inches), containing 6-7 seeds per pod. 
Shape oval, ovate in cross-section, slightly curved, straight backed, 
regular, crowded, filled to the tip and edge, and somewhat bluntly 
pointed on the end. Spur long, slender, and slightly recurved. 
Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds small, .9 x .6 x .55 cm. (130 per oz.); short oval, slightly 
more plump than the Navy pea; ends abruptly rounded to truncate. 
Hilum small, slightly protuberant. Color dull white, showing more 
numerous and darker gray vein-like markings than does Navy. 

Rouge D'Orleans. Refs. 47, 98. Syns. Scarlet 
Orleans. Under the name Red Orleans, which is the 
translation of the name here given, Burr describes a 
pole bean; but the only Orleans bean we find in French 
literature and the one grown at this Station and at the 
Missouri Botanical Garden is a dwarf sort. At best 
this variety was grown in America only experimentally, 
unless it was a precursor to the variety Red Marrow, 
grown in western New York, whose origin is unknown 
but which dates back to the last recorded dates for 
Orleans and which corresponds very closely to it. Red 
Orleans plants, however, put out many runners and the 
seeds had a black eye-ring. 

Snowflake. Refs. 48, 63, 84, 85, 91. Snowflake 
was introduced in 1888 by Gregory who claimed it to 
be the earliest and most productive pea bean, but Tracy 
and Jarvis found it less productive than Navy with 
narrower pods and smaller seeds. From Gregory's figure 
of plant and pods, data from a Kansas test in 1890, and 
our own recent tests, the seeds seem to be fully as large 
as those of Navy. At present it is little grown outside 
of Maine and Massachusetts. 

Soldier. Syns. Johnson Bean. This is a bean 
grown in Maine and New Hampshire which is very 
similar to China Red-eye, but, as grown here, has taller 
plants, rather finer foliage, much longer and slenderer 
pods, containing 6 beans which are long, kidney -shaped 
rather than oval. The seed markings are similar to the 
markings on Brittle Wax and Old Fashioned Yellow Eye, 
but are a brownish red in color. It is a good bean for 
baking. 

Sulphur. Refs. 43, 48. Syns. California Cream, 
China Yellow, Eureka, Golden Cranberry, Golden Drop, 
Robin's Egg, Self-seasoning. Older names should take 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



83 



preference over Sulphur, but as this is practically the 
only name now listed, it is used to introduce a very old 
variety. It was probably first known in America as 
China Yellow or Yellow China, but these names occur 
only as synonyms in publications of the past 60 years. 
Golden Cranberry, with several synonyms, followed 
China Yellow; then Robin's Egg and Golden Drop were 
used, succeeded by Eureka, California Cream or Pea, 
Sulphur, and Self-seasoning. Careful study of available 
descriptions shows little, if any, difference between the 
plants, pods, or seeds of the strains thus differently 
named. Of the names given, Eureka seems to have a 
distinct history, this being used by the Ford Seed Com- 
pany in 1893 to reintroduce an old variety; also, Self- 
seasoning was used in the same way by Gill in 1918. 

All of these varieties or strains must be considered 
undesirable as snap beans, and even the green-shell beans 
are rather too small for wide use. They are in season 
with Navy Pea as dry shell beans and are considered by 
some excellent for soup or baking because of a rather 
distinct flavor. The variety is not especially productive. 

The Yellow Canada of Burr carries as a synonym 
Round American Kidney which he also gives as a 
synonym of Golden Cranberry, but the dry beans differ 
in having a red rather than greenish line about the hilum, 
as have the other varieties described. 

Plant 1 to ljj feet tall, with heavy, erect stem, well branched 
and quite spreading, but very few or no runners; foliage abundant, 
medium to dark green, glossy, considerably crumpled; leaflets large, 
broad, shortly taper-pointed. Flowers phlox pink. Pods 4 to 4} 2 
inches long, 3^ to } 2 inch wide, plump, straight or slightly curved, 
slightly constricted, ends double rounded, with } 2 inch rather heavy, 
rigid, slightly curved tip from near center. Seeds usually 5, about 
75 to 80 to the ounce, small to medium; short ovate with protuberant 
eye, very plump, ends short -rounded, cream or light sulfur yellow 
in color, slightly veiny, with a narrow, faint greenish eye-ring which 
may darken to brown or chocolate. 

Thousand-fold Dwarf White. This was a very 
old pea of German origin; late and of no particular value 
and now unknown by name. It was intermediate 
between Dwarf Princess and Dwarf Rice. 

Plants 1 to 1/6 feet tall, very much branched, with many 
runners of equal or greater length; pods short, 3 to 3}4 inches long, 
narrow, straight, with strong, short tip; seeds 4 or 5, oval, slightly 
flattened or lenticular, slightly larger than those of Dwarf Rice, 
white in color. 

Turtle Soup. Refs. 13, 43, 47, 48, 56, 91, 97, 98. 
Syns. Black Turtle Soup, Black Spanish, Brazilian 
Running Bean, Tampico, Venezuelan. Turtle Soup is a 
very old variety grown as a field bean. It apparently 
originated in northeastern South America or possibly in 
Chile and was widely found, as shown by its many 
Spanish, Portuguese, Mexican, and Indian synonyms. 
It was taken to Europe presumably by Spaniards and 
was listed by Zuciagui, an Italian botanist, in 1806. 
Irish says it was known in Germany before 1860, but we 
find no record of its growth in France. In the United 
States, Thorburn offered it as early as 1832, but it was 
known in the South long before that time. The only 
real use for the variety is for making soups, to which the 
dry black beans give a distinct flavor and a greenish 
color somewhat similar to that of the green turtle soup 



so popular along southern sea coasts. Turtle Soup is 
quite productive, the young pods are crisp and tender, 
but they soon become very tough and stringy and are 
poor in color, being marked with purple; while the green- 
shell beans are too small to be desirable for cooking. 
It is very late in season, occasionally failing to mature 
in the North, and is quite different in growth habit from 
any other sort. 

Plant considered dwarf, 15 to 18 inches high, spreading and 
very thick, throwing out many runners that may reach 2 to 4 feet 
if poles are supplied; extremely vigorous, very hardy and productive; 
stems erect; branches moderate in number, quite purple. Foliage 
only medium abundant, light green, rather small, 3 to 3J2 inches 
long, 2 to 2 1 2 inches broad, surface pubescent, slightly wrinkled, a 
little rough, thin; leaflets broadly oval or heart shaped, slightly 
taper pointed with blunt tips. Flowers rose purple. 

Pods borne well below the foliage also to some extent in the 
lower leaf axils of runners; dark green in color. Quality poor; 
tough, stringy, fibrous and coarse in texture. Size medium long, 
broad and slender (4— 5}4 x &— } x ' t~ :< s inches), containing 7-8 
seeds. Shape flat; oval thru cross-section, straight to slightly 
curved, straight-backed, moderately constricted, fairly crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and the edge and abruptly rounded at the 
end. Spur moderately long, slender and recurved. Suture, 
placental is flattened and carpellary, moderately acute. 

Seeds small (.1.15 x .65 x .45 cm.) containing 150-60 per oz. 
Shape sub-reniform, quite flattened; ends abruptly rounded or 
decidedly flattened or squared, probably due to the close arrange- 
ment in the pod. Hilum small and depressed or indented. Color 
jet black over the entire surface. Apparently there are two strains 
that differ in this respect; one is a shining jet black after the 
sparse bloom has been removed and the other is a very dull, 
unattractive black. 

Vineless Marrow. This was one of many strains 
or types grown in western New York before 1900, but 
was first recommended and cataloged by Ferry in 1896. 
It became quite generally distributed and was also known 
and widely grown on the Pacific Coast. Except in small 
areas in this State, it was not extensively grown and 
gradually lost popularity until only two seedsmen listed 
it in 1921. 

Plants large, erect, with comparatively few branches; runner- 
less; foliage coarse, medium green. Flowers white. Pods of medium 
length, straight or slightly curved, with heavy straight tips nearly 
central on rounded ends, broad and heavy, constricted, green, not 
edible. Seeds of Nova Scotia Marrow type, not quite as large, 
distinctly ovate, among best of marrows for baking and large enough 
for fairly satisfactory use as green-shells. 

White Flageolet. Refs. 13, 16, 26, 47, 48, 53, 63, 
93, 94, 97, 98. Syns. First of All, French Flageolet, 
Stanton, White Canterbury, White Swiss. White 
Flageolet or White Canterbury is a very old variety, 
probably being the " Larger White dwarf " of Mawe- 
Abercrombie, and the ancestor of the many varieties 
and strains of white, kidney-shaped beans now known 
and of more numerous ones that have passed from culti- 
vation. Like all varieties that have been in cultivation 
over a long period, many improved strains of White 
Flageolet have been offered, several of which were con- 
sidered to have separate characters and therefore were 
introduced under an entirely different name. White 
Flageolet is the same as Triumph of the Frames in habit 
of growth and character of foliage ; the pods are slightly 
smaller, more curved, darker in color, and more depressed 
between beans. 



84 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



First of All was called new by Vilmorin in 1883, 
who credits its origination to Mons. Bonnemain, Secre- 
tary of the Etampes Horticultural Society. As tested 
at Geneva it was considered the same as White Flageloet 
but earlier and more vigorous. French Flageolet origin- 
ated by the same improver was also considered as an 
improved White Flageolet. Vaughan considered French 
Flageolet to be a sport of Canadian Wonder (crimson 
seeded). Stanton is probably White Flageolet. It was 
brought into Onondaga County many years before 1893 
by Rufus Stanton. The notes regarding earliness and 
size, shape, color, and quality of the beans prove it very 
similar to the Flageolets; yet the failure to mention 
extra length of pods excludes French Flageolet. 

Plant 1 J 3 to 1 ' 2 feet tall, often smaller, strong, many branches, 
not twining, quite leafy; leaflets dark green, rather small, broadly 
ovate, often slightly heart-shaped, short-pointed, rather thin and 
papery. Flowers white. Pods 5 ' jj to 6 inches long, sickle shaped, 
green while young, yellowish white at maturity. Ready as snaps 
in 7 weeks, as green shells in eleven weeks, and mature in thirteen 
weeks. Very productive, young pods crisp and tender. Seeds 6, 
rarely 7, white, kidney-shaped, flattened, three-fourths inch long, 
three-tenths inch broad; either green or ripe remarkable for delicacy 
of flavor, ripe seed polished, ivory like, white. 

White Kidney. Refs. 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 28, 29, 

38, 43, 47, 48, 49, 54, 56, 61, 63, 66, 77, 91, 93, 94, 97, 98. 
Syns. Imperial Dwarf Kidney, Royal Dwarf Kidney, 
White Date Bean. Beans of the White Kidney type are 
more than a century old in the United States, appearing 
in the catalog of Thorburn as early as 1822. The White 
Canterbury beans of Mawe-Abercrombie were small- 
podded snap beans; but Long White Canterbury grown 
at Geneva in 1883 was found to duplicate White Kidney, 
though ripe two weeks earlier and far less disease- 
resistant. White Swiss was equally hardy, but put 
out more runners and produced larger, oblong rather 
than kidney-shaped, pure white beans. Krup Morgen- 
hauser, grown at this Station in 1883, was a White 
Kidney with many runners. Oliver Field, introduced 
by Vaughan in 1906, was said by him to be as early as 
the Marrows; but Tracy, after a rather incomplete trial, 
considered it to be only a very good stock of White 
Kidney. Martens classed White Kidney under Phaseo- 
lus oblongus albus. 

White Kidney is very similar in most respects to 
Red Kidney, later in season, with seed white instead of 
red, and leaflets larger and wider. Imperial or White 
Imperial is sometimes grown in place of White Kidney. 
Seed of Imperial is smaller, straighter across the eye, less 
yellow around eye, veining more prominent. 

Plant very large, 15 to 18 inches tall with spread of 15 inches 
or less; very erect, bushy, compact, without runners; very vigorous, 
productive of long bearing period; thick stemmed, moderately 
branched, green thruout. Foliage abundant, dark green; leaf sur- 
face crumpled, rough, heavy veined, slightly pubescent, thick, 
leaflets large, 5 inches long by 4 inches wide, widest near base, 
terminal leaflet well rounded, side leaflets often quite one sided, 
but even so, rounded, appearing as circular except for short triangle 
with short tip. Flowers white. 

Pods borne both above and below the foliage: light green in 
color. Quality poor; very stringy, tough and fibrous. Size long, 
broad, and slender, S'^x 2 .-',! ', inches, containing 5-6 
seeds per pod. Shape flat, ovate in cross-section, straight backed, I 



regular to somewhat constricted, crowded, smooth, filled to the tip 
and edge and rounded at the end. Spur long, slender and recurved. 
Suture, placental is flat to somewhat rounded, and carpellary, acute. 
Seeds large, 1.6x.8x.6 cm. (45-50 per oz.l, oblong to dis- 
tinctly reniform, fairly plump to somewhat flattened; ends rounded. 
Hilum medium, somewhat protuberant. Color white to slightly 
cream, especially about the hilum, dull, distinctly veined. 

\^ bite Lental. The name Lental may be a mis- 
spelling of lentil, a group of forage and seed -producing 
plants allied to the peas which have lens-shaped seeds 
only slightly smaller in diameter than the length of the 
seeds of White Lental. White Lental is, however, a true 
bean which appears identical with a Russian (Siberian) 
variety grown here under the name Small White Ekat- 
erinoslav. It is early, ripens evenly, and produces good 
yields of small pods. The beans, which are very small, 
are said to be unequalled in flavor for soups or baking. 
Gill Bros, introduced this bean in 1918. 

Plants very similar to those of Navy Pea, but smaller, more 
slender and finer in every way, much branched and with many short 
runners. Pods short, 2J4 to 2 7 g inches long, of medium width, 
round, plump, slightly constricted, well filled, with rounded to 
pointed ends and long, slender, recurving tips. Seeds about 6, very 
short oval approaching spherical, usually less than ] 4 inch long, 
almost as wide, and more than half as thick, cream-colored. 

White Marrow. Refs. 10, 13, 16, 29, 41, 43, 48, 

49, 61, 63, 77, 91. Syns. Dwarf White Cranberry, Great 
Western, Marrowfat, Mountain, White Cranberry, 
White Marrowfat, White Egg. Although a very old 
variety grown in the United States for more than a 
century, White Marrow is still more widely listed under 
this name or some of its many variants and synonyms 
than any other field bean except Red Kidney, though 
both of these are grown on smaller acreages than Navy 
or Boston Pea bean. Large Marrow, or Mountain, is 
probably identical to White Mammoth, the differences, 
if constant, lying in the direction of more slender plants 
with longer runners and possibly larger seeds. Boston 
Marrow was listed in 1856 as a baking bean and has 
been offered more or less constantly since that time by 
a few seedsmen, but its cultivation seems to be very 
local. Its seeds are noticeably larger than those of 
Large White Marrow. It appears to be a selection of 
White Marrow. 

Plants large, 1 ] g to 1 ! 2 feet tall, with heavy stems and many 
branches, very spreading and with many quite long, trailing runners, 
green thruout; foliage medium green, slightly crumpled; leaflets 
4 to 4 1 2 inches long, 3 3 4 to 4 inches wide near base, slightly rounded 
to short, blunt tip. Flowers white. Pods 5 inches long or more, 
almost straight, sometimes slightly hooked or enlarged near tip, 
nearly ' 2 inch wide, thick, constricted between beans, green, not 
edible. Seeds 5, occasionally 6, rather short, plump ovate, with 
fully rounded ends, about 80 to the ounce. 

Yellow Eye. Refs. 23, 43, 48, 77, 91, 97, 98. 

Syns. Dot Eye, Imperial Yellow Eye, Improved Yellow 
Eye, Molasses Face, Yellow-Eyed China. Beans of the 
Yellow Eye type are very old and exceedingly apt to 
vary, through environmental conditions as well as by 
breeding and selection, so considerable confusion exists 
in bean literature in regard to the different strains. The 
oldest known reference is that in Martens whose illus- 
tration shows a type very similar to that of the Old- 
Fashioned Yellow Eye of Jarvis. Burr's description of 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



85 



Yellow Eyed China also conveys the idea of a bean 
quite prominently colored about the eye, somewhat 
" butterfly marked." There are but three varieties of 
the Yellow Eye bean that are of commercial importance. 
The Improved Yellow Eye (or Molasses Face) is the 
variety most commonly called for in the Boston market. 

Seed, medium large to large, slightly less than s £ of an inch, 
proportionately broad, plump, width \ _> of the length, rounded at 
each end, no taper at either end, straight at eye. Color, outside the 
eve. clear opaque white, eye pattern large and should cover about 
one-fourth the area. Viewed from top should show a very narrow 
margin of white on all sides of eye with exception of anterior end 
(micropyle) where color may extend farther towards the lower 
surface, color surrounding hilum may be slightly darker. 

Old -Fashioned Yellow Eye is grown in Maine 
and Vermont and the claim is made by many that this 
strain bakes much better and has a better flavor than 
any other. 

Seed, slightly more flattened laterally than the Improved, 
slight taper towards anterior end, which end is also slightly trun- 
cated, dorsal side rounded and taper towards the anterior end. 
Ground color clear, opaque white; pattern, three color areas, the 
first, a rather narrow strip of pigment extending anteriorly from the 
front of micropyle to apex of bean; second, surrounding the micro- 
pyle and extending in form of horse-shoe around anterior end of hilum 
may or may not unite with anterior stripe; third extends posteriorly, 
almost to posterior edge of bean, posterior edge often forked, starting 
behind caruncle two rather broad wings extend forward along sides 
of hilum. These wings should not unite with color area surrounding 
the micropyle. 

Imperial Yellow Eye or Dot Eye is the last important 
type and is named because the markings consist of two 
small dots or blotches of color on either side of the 
hilum. This type is gaining in popularity and is also 
favored by some packers. For an extended treatise on 
the Yellow Eye see the account in Pearson and Surface 
in Maine Agr. Exp. Station Bui. No. 239, 1915. 

Plant either erect or trailing according to the strain, leaflets 
large, dark green, thick surface rough, crumpled, terminal widest 
\i distance from base, straight sided, long taper to slender point, 
side leaflets, unequal sided, straight across base, taper to long 
curved tip. Flowers white. 

Pods borne below foliage; also to some extent in the lower leaf 
axils of runners. Light waxy green in color. Quality poor, very 
tough and stringy, quite fibrous and coarse in texture. Size medium 
long, broad and rather slender, (4^2-5 x Jg-J^ x -fg inches), contain- 
ing 5-6 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross-section, straight 
or slightly curved, straight backed, slightly constricted, fairly 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and rounded at the end. Spur 
long, slender, straight or slightly curved. Suture, placental is flat 
and carpellary, acute. 

THE LIMA BEANS 
The varieties of lima beans in cultivation today are 
evenly divided between pole and dwarf types. Bailey, 
1895-96, Ref. 7, 8, discussed the origin and introduction 
of most of these varieties. The ancient history of the 
lima bean is given in detail in a more recent publication 
by Van Eseltine (Variation in the Lima Bean, 
Phaseolus Lunatus L., as Illustrated by its Syn- 
onomy. New York State Agr. Exp. Sta. Tech. 
Bui. No. 182. 1931). A plant native to South 
America, where it grows as a perennial, the lima bean 
was introduced into the United States several times. 



One of the earliest introductions, recorded in 1824, was 
made by Captain John Harris, U. S. N., who brought 
some seed from Lima, Peru, and grew it on his farm at 
Chester, N. Y. Before this time plants had been grown 
in the South, being mentioned by Lawson in his voyage 
to Carolina in 1700-08. These plants as found in 
cultivation by the Indians and early settlers of Carolina 
probably came from the West Indies. It is certain 
that after 1825 the lima came into general cultivation 
as a garden vegetable in the eastern states. 

The greatest impetus to the production of this 
group of Phaseolus in America came when its possibilities 
as a field crop for California was recognized. The first 
recorded information on the lima in California (Hendry) 
is an advertisement by H. McNally Company of San 
Francisco in the Alta of 1855. In 1872 they were 
tried in the Carpinteria Valley, and in 1875 they were 
first grown for an eastern seed firm, Dexter M. Ferry. 
About 1890 a strain known as Lewis originated on the 
farm of Dozier Lewis, and became the one most com- 
monly grown although thought to be a mixture of 
several varieties. After the determined fact that 
certain areas, particularly in Santa Barbara, Ventura, 
Orange, Los Angeles, and San Diego Counties, Calif., 
were well adapted to the growth of the lima, production 
increased tremendously. Practically all of the dry 
lima bean seed and all of the seed for eastern growing 
is now produced in that region. Green shell limas are 
produced as a garden crop in nearly every state in the 
country, but the production of dry seed is a specialty 
of California. 

The dwarf varieties as garden limas all appeared in 
public during the decade of 1880 to 1890. They came 
as sports from pole varieties and were popular from the 
time of first introduction. The Henderson and Dreer 
were introduced in 1889 and the Burpee in 1890. Stocks 
of these three types, " sieva," " potato lima," and 
" flat lima," had been grown for several years by 
individuals and finally found their way to commercial 
seedsmen. The only other dwarf variety which has 
gained commercial importance is the Fordhook, a 
potato lima type. 

The pole varieties of lima beans have been in culti- 
vation for many years, but from time to time improved 
strains earlier in season and with larger seeds have been 
offered. The large flat types and the sievas occur in 
the pole varieties as well as in the dwarfs, but the 
potato type, with the exception of the Challenger, is 
not so generally represented. While it is true that 
19 varieties of pole limas and 13 varieties of dwarfs 
have been described and that many other names occur 
as synonyms, a study of individual seed catalogs will 
show the relatively few varieties carried by any one 
house. Inspection of these so-called varieties growing 
in the field (both dwarfs and poles) shows only a few 
distinct types. The true separatory characters between 
many varieties of lima beans apparently well established 
are exceedingly difficult to measure or describe definitely. 



86 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



POLE VARIETIES 
Black Lima. This variety was introduced by 
Burpee in 1892, at which time he distributed several 
thousand trial packages to the trade for observation. 
Although it was evidently vigorous, hardy, productive, 
and quite resistant to rot, its seed color reacted as a 
detriment to its popularity. Black Lima was undoubt- 
edly only a strain of Florida Butter ; probably a selection 
in which a greater percentage of the dry seeds were black 
or very dark colored. Jarvis considered it synonymous 
with Florida Butter, but inasmuch as the variety was 
never grown at this Station, his statement can neither 
be verified nor disproved. 

Carpenteria. Syns. Carpenteria Large Green 
Seeded, Green Prolific, Green Seeded, New Carpenteria. 
This variety originated from the seed stock of two 
Burpee Improved Bush Lima plants. The plants were 
discovered by Henry Fish of Carpenteria, California, in 
1906, and apparently sold to several seed houses that 
introduced the variety about 1910. It has been sug- 
gested that since Burpee Improved originated as a 
sport in a field of Challenger Pole Limas — incidentally 
by the same man but in a different field — it would seem 
that Carpenteria might be a reversion to the primary pole 
types and not to Challenger which is a thick-seeded potato 
variety. At the time Burr wrote his Field and Garden 
Vegetables of America, in 1863, there were five distinct 
types of limas — all poles. Among these was one known 
as Green Lima, then called a sub-variety of the Common 
Lima, differing chiefly from that variety in having pea 
green colored seeds. Today, even as then, stocks of 
lima beans are badly mixed, thereby necessitating careful 
selection and skillful cultural methods in order to keep 
a strain pure to any degree of permanency. Carpenteria 
is one of the first pole varieties to maintain the green 
pigment consistently. It is suggested, then, that the 
variety must have been linked in some manner to the 
original green-seeded variety of Burr's period. Although 
the variety today is not classified as popular as is King 
of the Garden, Leviathan, or Small White, it does rank 
as medium in importance. This is due largely to its seed 
color, moderately heavy production, and vigorous growth. 
At Geneva it required 102 days to reach maturity, the 
same as Sunnybrook, 2 days earlier than Dreer's Im- 
proved, and 5 days later than Small White. 

Plant tall, vigorous, climbing; moderately heavy yielder, but 
rather short seasoned in Geneva. Foliage moderately abundant, 
medium green, vines whitened, few small white areas between vein, 
dull finish, smooth, moderately thick, but quite leathery. Leaflets 
large, 4-5 x 2 J4-2J j inches. Petioles medium long. Flowers white. 

Pods medium to light green in color. Size long, broad, and 
quite slender (,4-5 x 1-1 J ■_> x :i g- ' ■_, inchesi, containing 3-5 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross-section, straight, straight 
backed, fairly regular, moderately crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip but not to the edge and squared at the end. Spur short, 
thick and straight. Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 2.0xl.35x.5 cm. 125-30 per oz.); long broad 
reniform, occasionally semicircular, elliptical thru cross-section, 
flat; ends uniformly rounded. Hilum medium, flat and slightly 
incurved. Color pale greenish white to dull white, marked with 
rather prominent, darker shaded, converging lines radiating from 



the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface moderately smooth. 
Quality excellent. 

Challenger. Refs. 8, 9, 10, IS, 22, 24, 29, 41, 43, 
57, 58, 63, 77, 85, 91, 97, 98. Syns. Dreer, Dreer's 
Improved, Elliot's Improved Pole Lima, Forbes Potato 
Pole, Improved Challenger, Noll's Ideal Potato Pole 
Lima, Potato Pole Lima, Shotwell's Pole Lima, Shot- 
well's Improved Thick, Walters Prolific Pole Lima, 
Walters Prolific Potato Leaf, Walter's Prolific Thick. 
A variety which was called Dreer Pole Lima is said to 
have originated with Mr. Kimber of Kimberton, Pa., 
about 1857, and was introduced by Henry A. Dreer in 
1875. About the same time V. J. Hadden of East Orange, 
N. J., had been growing a variety known as Challenger 
for many years. John M. Kumerle of Newark, N. J., 
whose attention had been attracted to it, secured some 
of the seed and later sold it to J. M. Thorburn, who 
introduced it in 1882 under the name it now bears. At 
that time it was said to be an improvement over the 
Dreer and some seedsmen undoubtedly offered it as such. 
Today, most seedsmen and authorities consider the two 
varieties identical — certainly the seed of Challenger has 
been often substituted for Dreer. It is fairly safe to say 
that the best strains of Challenger are more productive 
of longer pods than the Dreer, but otherwise they may 
be considered the same. Challenger is one of the old 
well-known and still popular varieties of the potato- 
seeded type. It is apparently better adapted to the 
East and North than to other sections of the country. 
It is considered excellent for both home and market 
gardens, and next to the small-seeded varieties, like 
Sieva and Henderson, is one of the most sure croppers 
and productive varieties in its class. In season Chal- 
lenger came to maturity in 102 days at Geneva, 5 days 
later than Small White, and the same as King of the 
Garden. It is interesting to note that the Dreer strain 
produced edible beans two days later. Challenger differs 
from the Large White chiefly in that the leaflets are 
more narrow, longer pointed, and duller green in color; 
pods shorter, thicker, and much straighter, dry seeds 
are smaller, decidedly more plump and nearly sub- 
circular in outline. The pods and leaves are similar to 
Dreer's Bush, although somewhat larger and much later 
in season. 

Plant climbing 6-8 feet with a 2 foot spread at the base. 
Vigorous, very productive, quite late in season. Fairly stout 
stems, many branches both medial and basal in position. Foliage 
abundant, medium dull grayish green in color; veins lightly colored; 
surface smooth, practically without pubescence and medium thick. 
Leaflets large, rather long pointed but broad at the base 4 ' £ 5 x 
2 :i 4 '-2 7 s inches). Petioles medium long. Flowers white, peduncle 
moderately long, semi-rigid. 

Pods medium green in color. Size moderately long, very 
broad and quite plump, (.3-4 xl'j x ',-' ■> inches), containing 3-4 
seeds per pod. Shape flat, long broad oval thru cross-section, 
straight, straight backed, slightly constricted, moderately crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge and square at the 
ends. Spur very indistinct, extremely short, stout and straight. 
Suture, placental is flattened to slightly rounded and carpellary, 
acute. 

Seeds medium large, 1.7 x 1.3 x .75 cm. (30-35 per oz.); nearly 
semicircular, ventral surface inclined to be somewhat protuberant, 
elliptical thru cross-section, quite plump; ends uniformly rounded 




(Natural size) 



LONG JOINTED POLE LIMA — DREER 




..Natural sue; 



SHORT JOINTED POLE LIMA — LARGE GREEN SEEDED 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



87 



and occasionally inclined to be somewhat blunt or squared. Hilum 
large, flat. Color dull and occasionally greenish white, indistinctly 
marked with darker shaded, converging lines from the hilum to the 
dorsal margin. Surface smooth. Quality excellent. 

Detroit Mammoth. This variety was introduced 
by D. M. Ferry & Company in 1917, apparently after 
many years of careful selection. Although of consider- 
able importance as a type, this particular variety is 
listed by comparatively few seedsmen. The plant is 
very similar to Challenger with foliage perhaps slightly 
darker. Pods and seeds look identical to Burpee's Giant 
Podded, varying in size, as suggested in the discussion 
of that variety, with some strains that produce pods as 
much as 7 to 9 inches long and 1 } ± to 1 } 2 inches wide 
down to the more average figure reported in the detailed 
description. 

Extra Early Jersey. Refs. 8, 9, 24, 29, 45, 48, 58, 
59. 63, 75, 91. Syns. Bliss's Extra Early Pole Lima. 
Bliss, Early Jersey, Extra Early, Jersey. This well- 
known variety originated in Lewaren, N. Y., and was 
introduced by B. K. Bliss and Sons as Bliss's Extra Early 
in 1878. It later acquired the name Jersey by some 
combination of which it has been known ever since. 
It is considered quite satisfactory for home gardens, 
but Seiberts Pole and Leviathan are more desirable 
for both home and market gardens. At Geneva, 
Early Jersey was one of the earliest of the large- 
seeded pole limas, coming into bearing in 99 days, 5 
days earlier than Dreer's Improved, 3 days earlier than 
Seiberts, and 2 days later than Small White. Extra 
Early Jersey somewhat resembles Seibert, differing from 
this variety in being a few days earlier, less productive, 
and with smaller pods and seeds. It also compares 
similarly with Large White, being slightly earlier in 
season and having shorter pods. 

Plant large, climbing 5 feet or better with a 2 foot spread at 
base: moderately productive; vigorous, multi-branched, thick- 
stemmed, moderately long bearing season. Foliage abundant, 
medium to dark green, no grayish tinge present, smooth, light 
veined, very slight amount of pubescence and medium thick. 
Leaflets medium large, 5x3 inches, broad, petioles moderately long. 
Flowers white, becoming cream colored with age, peduncles moder- 
ately long. 

Pods medium dark green. Size medium long, very broad 
and moderately slender (4— 4} 2 x 1-1 }{ x -fg— } 2 inches), containing 
3^4 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long oval to oblong ovate in cross- 
section, moderately curved, occasionally slightly twisted, straight 
backed, somewhat constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to tip 
but not to the edge and square at the end. Spur very short and 
indistinct, stout and straight. Suture, placental is flat to slightly 
indented and carpellary, acute. 

Seed medium to large, 2.0xl.45x.55 cm. (20-25 per oz.). 
Nearly semicircular, somewhat sub-reniform, moderately long, broad, 
flattened, elliptical thru cross-section; ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum medium, flat and slightly incurved. Color white with a 
slight greenish tinge, marked with darker shaded, indistinct, con- 
verging lines from the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface relatively 
smooth. Quality fair to good. 

Florida Butter. Refs. 91. Syns. Old Florida 
Pole, Speckled Beauty, Speckled Pole Lima, Spotted 
Butter. This lima is one of the oldest of its type. 
Its origin is unknown to the authors, but inasmuch 
that Burr listed a small sieva type pole lima, known 
as Mottled Sieva, it is quite possible that it was the 



type forerunner of the present-day Florida Butter. 
The rise and decline of the variety's popularity have 
been quite periodical. At the time of Tracy and 
Jarvis, the variety was little known, since Tracy states 
that the variety was no longer listed by American 
seedsmen. However, about 1910 or 1911 the variety 
was revived and once more listed. Florida Butter 
has been and still is most suitable for the southern 
states. It is considered by many the most prolific of 
limas, and as such has gained an important position in 
the cropping system of southern growers. The vine and 
the size and shape of the seed readily classify it as a 
member of the sieva group, but the characteristic color 
markings on the seeds make it a distinct variety. It has 
been confused by some with Jackson Wonder, Calico, and 
Mottled, but on the basis of seed characteristics it can- 
not be considered synonymous with them. Undoubtedly 
Florida Butter seed has been sold as Calico, thus leading 
to confusion. With the exception of seed color, the 
variety is most similar to Small White, differing from 
that variety in being slightly more vigorous of vine and 
a trifle more productive, although slightly later in season 
in most localities. At Geneva, Florida Butter produced 
edible seeds in 97 days, the same as for Small White, 
1 week earlier than Dreer's Improved, and 5 days earlier 
than King of the Garden. 

Plant similar to Sieva, tall, climbing 5-8 feet or more, with 
a 2 ft. spread at the base of plant. Vigorous, large yielder over a 
comparatively long bearing season. Stem moderately slender, 
multi-branched. Foliage abundant, dark glossy green, smooth, 
light-veined. Without pubescence and medium thick and leathery. 
Leaflets medium, very broad, 3] ox 2^4 inches, occasionally some- 
what larger, but always in the same proportion. Petioles moderately 
long, slender. Flowers white. Peduncles long, clustered, rather 
limp. 

Pods medium dark green. Size short to medium, fairly broad, 
and quite slender (3-3 }4 x % x ]4~ vs inches), containing 3 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, long oval to oblong ovate in cross-section, 
slightly curved, somewhat curled or twisted from side to side, 
straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but 
not to the edge and gradually rounded, almost tapering at the end. 
Spur moderately long, slender and straight. Suture, placental is 
flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds small, 1.55 x 1.05 x .45 cm. (70-75 per oz.), broad sub- 
reniform, somewhat semicircular, flat, elliptical thru cross-section; 
ends, one somewhat wider and more evenly rounded than the other. 
Hilum medium, flat and slightly incurved. Color light buff (Tillent- 
buff) blotched and irregularly spotted with reddish brown (Hessian 
brown), deep maroon (Harp maroon), or nearly black over one end 
and a portion of the sides, hilar and dorsal surfaces. The buff 
colored portion is very finely speckled with the same variations of 
shades; a moderately wide, purplish-black eye-ring is evident. 
Surface smooth; quality fair to good. 

Fords Mammoth. Refs. 8, 24, 41, 48, 58, 59, 85, 

91. Syns. Ford, Fords Extra Large Mammoth, Fords 
Mammoth-Podded Lima, Mammoth Kidney-shaped. 
The variety originated with James Ford, a market 
gardener near Frankford, Pa., as a selection from Large 
White. It was introduced by Johnson and Stokes in 
1889 who had purchased the entire stock of the originator. 
The variety has often been considered quite similar to 
King of the Garden in utility and value. Although the 
pods and seeds are supposed to be larger than the above- 
named variety, it has never approached the position of 



88 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



importance assumed by it. This has been caused, 
undoubtedly, by the lesser productiveness of Ford. At 
Geneva, edible seeds were produced in 104 days, the 
same as Challenger and 5 days later than Extra Early 
Jersey. The variety has changed very little in the past 
20 years. It still most resembles King of the Garden, 
having pods about the same size, containing three to 
four large white seeds. Formerly it was considered to 
have much longer pods with five to six seeds, but at the 
Geneva trials this was not found to be consistently true. 

Plant large, 5-8 feet, vigorous climber, moderately to poorly 
productive over a comparatively short season, nearly the last to 
come into bearing. Thick-stemmed, multi-branched, both medial 
and basal in position. Foliage abundant, medium to light green, 
dull, smooth; pubescence absent, or very fine, thick and leathery. 
Leaflets large, quite long (3-3 J^ x 5— 5J4 inches), quite sharply 
tapering. Petioles moderately long. Flowers white, peduncle 
long, quite rigid. 

Pods medium light green in color. Size very long, broad and 
moderately plump (Wjxl-ljis^-'i inches), containing 3^ 
seeds per pod. Shape flat, long, moderately broad oval in cross- 
section, quite straight, somewhat curled or twisted from side to 
side, straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, moderately 
well filled to the tip and edge and abruptly rounded to square on 
the end. Spur absent or very short, moderately stout and straight. 
Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 2.1 x 1.5 x .55 cm. (25 per oz.l; broad sub-reni- 
form, occasionally nearly semicircular: flat, elliptical in cross-section; 
ends quite uniformly rounded. Hilum medium, flattened and 
incurved. Color quite uniformly very pale, greenish white, indis- 
tinctly marked with converging lines of a slightly darker shade. 
Surface comparatively smooth. Quality excellent. 

Giant Podded. This variety was introduced by 
Burpee in 1910 who gives credit for the origination to 
a N. S. Prime of Huntingdon. Long Island. In 1905, 
Henry F. Mitchell introduced a variety called Giant, 
evidently considered at the time as an improvement 
over Salem Mammoth in having slightly longer pods. 
Today these two strains, as well as certain other large- 
podded strains, have intermixed so that Giant Podded 
is practically identical with the better varieties of the 
long-podded Large White type, resembling Salem Mam- 
moth perhaps more than any other. The variety is quite 
generally listed by American seedsmen today. It un- 
doubtedly has gained its present position because of its 
unusually long broad pods, which in some strains and in 
some sections are considerably larger than most. At 
Geneva some pods were found to be 8 to 10 inches long 
and 1 3 2 to 1^4 inches wide. The average, however, 
was somewhat less, as reported in the detailed description 
to follow. In season, Giant Podded came into harvest 
in 104 days, the same as Detroit Mammoth, but 1 day 
later than the leading large-seeded varieties Carpenteria, 
King of the Garden, and Seiberts. 

Plant large, climbing 8-10 feet, with a spread at the base of 
24-30 inches. Moderately vigorous, medium productive. Thick 
stemmed and medium number of branches more like medium thick, 
short limber twiners, both basal and medial in position. Foliage 
abundant, medium to dark green, grayish tint nearly absent, smooth 
or very slightly pubescent, light veined, medium thick and leathery. 
Leaflets quite long, but medium wide at the base (4js-5x3-3'| 
inches . Petioles medium short. Flowers white, large. Peduncles 
long and fairly rigid. 

Pods dark dull green in color. Size long, broad and moder- 
ately plump 5.' ..-6 1 .. x Ij 5 -1A- x fj-j2 inches), containing 



4—5 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long oval, in cross-section, moderately 
straight, somewhat curved, and twisted, straight backed, quite 
regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge, 
and rounded at the end. Spur short, thick, and straight. Suture, 
placental is flat, possibly somewhat rounded and carpellary, acute. 
Seeds large, 2.3 x 1.5 x .7 cm. ^20—25 per oz.); broad oblong, 
somewhat sub-reniform, flat, elliptical thru cross-section; ends quite 
uniformly rounded. Hilum medium, slightly protuberant, incurved. 
Color dull white, occasionally tinged with pale green quite distinctly 
marked with dull dun colored, converging lines. Surface moderately 
smooth. Quality excellent. 

Henderson's Ideal. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. Buist's 
Mammoth Podded Ideal, Ideal, Ideal Giant. This 
variety originated as an improved selection of Large 
White. It was developed by Henderson and introduced 
by that company in 1906. Ideal is not an extra early 
selection of Large White, but it achieved its position of 
importance when it was first introduced because of its 
greater productiveness. Although it is still considered 
a valuable and desirable bean, it is no better, and not 
consistently different from the better strains of its group. 
It greatly resembles King of the Garden, and Jarvis 
suggested that it probably is an improved strain of that 
variety. It differs in being more vigorous, slightly earlier, 
and occasionally more productive. In our trials, it was 
very similar to Extra Early Jersey in plant and foliage 
characteristics. At Geneva, Ideal came into production 
in 100 days, 1 day later than Jersey and 2 days earlier 
than King of the Garden. 

Plant large, 5—8 feet, vigorous climber, very productive, 
moderately long season. Stems thick, much branched. Foliage 
moderately abundant, medium to dark green with little if any gray, 
light veined, smooth to very slightly pubescent, medium thick and 
leathery. Leaflets moderately large, long and tapering [2$£-2% 
x4' 4 — 4 5 s inches). Petioles moderately long. Flowers white, 
peduncles long and semi-limber. 

Pods dark green in color. Size moderately long, broad, and 
medium slender (5— 5J^ x IJ4 — 1^ x }•£—& inches), containing 
3—1 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long, moderately broad oval, curved 
at tip end, straight backed, fairly regular, not crowded, smooth, 
moderately filled to the tip and edge and abruptly rounded at the 
end. Spur short, thick and straight. Suture, placental is flat and 
carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds large, 2.0 x 1.3 x .55 cm. (22 per oz.); nearly semi- 
circular to very broad sub-reniform, flattened, elliptical in cross- 
section; ends uniformly rounded. Hilum large, flat and slightly 
incurved. Color dull white, some tinged with pale green over the 
entire surface, marked with indistinct, converging, darker shaded 
lines from the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface comparatively 
smooth. Quality excellent. 

King of the Garden. Refs. 8, 9, 10, 36, 41, 48, 

59, 77, 79, 91. Syns. Buckbee's King of the Garden, 
Garden King, Piatt's Improved, Piatt King Lima, 
Piatt's King of the Garden, Schwill's Monstrous Pole. 
This variety was developed from Large White through 
constant selection for 5- and 6-seeded pods. It was 
introduced by Frank S. Piatt in 1883. Like many 
varieties which have been associated with the trade for 
a long time, its name has been used in connection with 
seed stock of inferior varieties and strains. Consequent- 
ly, all seed on the market called King of the Garden 
cannot be said to represent the superior and outstanding 
variety as originally selected. 

In season. King of the Garden matured in 102 days, 
the same as Carpenteria and Seiberts, 2 days earlier than 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



89 



Ford's Mammoth, and 5 days later than Small White. 
King of the Garden is more like Large White and Ideal 
than others, differing chiefly in later season and larger 
vine and leaflets. The plants and foliage are also veri- 
similar to Dreer. 

Plant tall, climbing, 6-9 feet, 2 ft. spread at the base. Vigor- 
ous, quite heavily productive over a moderately long season. Stems 
thick, multibranched. Foliage abundant, medium green, dull, 
smooth, veins often light colored, practically no pubescence, medium 
thick and leathery. Leaflets large, quite long, 2 3 4-2~ s x 5 1 s— 5*4 
inches. Flowers white. 

Pods medium light green in color, size long, broad and quite 
slender 6 1 .-7 x 1? g-l-fg x ys~ 3 » inches 1 , containing 5-6 seeds per 
pod. Shape flat, long narrow oval in cross -section, slightly curved, 
sometimes twisted, saddle-backed, somewhat constricted and dis- 
torted, not crowded, moderately smooth, not filled to the tip or the 
edge and gently rounded at the end. Spur absent or extremely 
short, stout and straight. Suture, placental is rounded and slightly 
indented and carpellary, moderately acute. 

Seeds large, 2.0 x 1.4 x .55 cm. (25 per oz.); nearly semi- 
circular, broad reniform, flat, elliptical thru cross-section; ends 
uniformly rounded. Hilum medium, slightly incurved. Color dull 
white, occasionally tinged with pale green, quite distinctly marked 
with converging lines from the hilum to the dorsum margin. Surface 
somewhat wrinkled. Quality excellent. 

Large White. Refs. 8. 9, 12, 13, 15, 24, 29, 41, 
48, 57, 59, 63, 91, 94, 97. 98. Syns. Butter, Common 
Lima. Haricot de Lima, Large Flat, Large Lima, May's 
Champion. This variety is probably the progenitor of 
all the large-seeded limas, both pole and dwarf. Un- 
doubtedly, the variety as grown today is somewhat 
different from what it was a hundred years or more ago. 
This has been due, of course, to the constant selection 
practiced by interested parties in order to compete more 
successfully with other varieties similar to it. The 
earliest positive evidence that we have relative to its 
introduction is the fact that J. M. Thorburn 8b Co. 
listed the variety as early as 1882. Large White still 
retains an important position among the leading varieties 
of its type. It is eclipsed, however, by King of the 
Garden, Leviathan, and Seiberts. It must be considered 
too late for use in the extreme northern portion of the 
states. At Geneva, however, it matured the same as 
King of the Garden, 102 days. In many instances the 
variety is being replaced by Seiberts, especially in the 
north. 

Plant large, rarely more than 8-10 feet, moderately vigorous 
climber, quite productive, season moderately long, same as Garden 
King. Stems thick, multi-branched. Foliage moderately abun- 
dant, medium to dull dark green, very smooth, practically non- 
pubescent, thick and fairly leathery. Leaflets moderately large, 
tapering (4x2} 2-2% inches). Petioles medium long. Flowers 
white. Peduncles long, semi-limber. 

Pods moderately light green in color; size long, broad and 
fairly slender (S-S. 1 ? x IJ4 x i^-, 1 2 inches), containing 3^1 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross-section, moderately curved, 
occasionally twisted, straight backed, quite regular, not crowded, 
rather rough, filled to the tip but not to the edge, and abruptly 
rounded to square on the end. Spur absent or very short, stout and 
stiff. Suture, placental is flat to slightly indented and carpellary, 
acute. 

Seeds large, 2.5 x 1.6 x. 6 cm. (25 per oz.); oblong, nearly 
semi-circular to broad reniform, flat, elliptical thru cross-section; 
ends uniformly rounded. Hilum large, flattened and incurved. 
Color dull white tinged with light green, indistinctly marked with 



converging lines from the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface 
moderately smooth. Quality good. 

Leviathan. Refs. 48, 77, 91. Syns. Early Levi- 
athan, Henderson's Leviathan. This large-seeded sort 
originated in Bergen County, N. J., and was introduced 
by Henderson in 1900. Jarvis suggested that it might 
be a selection from Seibert because the two varieties are 
quite similar in many characters. When first intro- 
duced it was considered by far the earliest large-seeded 
lima on the market. At Geneva, in recent years this 
has been found to be true only to a moderate degree 
since Leviathan produced edible seeds in 101 days, 
earlier by not more than 1 or 2 days than Carpenteria, 
King of the Garden, and Seiberts. Ideal proved to be 
1 day earlier than Leviathan. It is quite similar to 
Seibert, with larger, straighter pods, less inclined to 
curl and twist. It may also be compared to Ideal as 
having smaller seeds, more narrow pods, and less vigorous 
and productive vines. 

Plant moderately large, 5-8 feet, climbing. Quite vigorous, 
hardy, fairly productive. Stems thick; multi-branched. Foliage 
abundant, medium light dull green with small amount of gray color 
present, veins decidedly light veined, smooth, practically free from 
pubescence, medium thick and quite leathery. Leaflets medium 
large and broad (4— 4J4 x 254-2J5 inches). Petioles medium long. 
Flowers white, peduncle long, semi-limber. 

Pods medium light green in color; size moderately long fairly 
broad and slender (4)2-5xlH x /8 inches), containing 3^4- seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, long oval in cross-section, straight but slightly 
curved at tip end, straight backed, quite regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge, and quite abruptly 
rounded at the end. Spur very short, moderately stout and straight. 
Suture, placental is flat to slightly rounded and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 2.3 x 1.5 x .6 cm. (25-30 per oz.), long, broad 
reniform, elliptical thru cross-section, flattened ; ends quite uniformly 
rounded. Hilum medium, flat and incurved. Color dull white, 
occasionally tinged with pale green; quite distinctly marked with 
converging lines from the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface 
moderately smooth. Quality excellent. 

Red Lima. Refs. 98. This variety is not grown 
today and there is little if any evidence to show that it 
was ever grown as a commercial sort. The first record 
that we have of its appearance is in an article in the 
Country Gentleman, Vol. 23, p. 47, 1864, in which 
the following is written: "Red Lima bean — Produc- 
tive; does not grow very tall; bean thinner than Large 
White Lima." Burr does not mention this variety in 
his book written one year previous. It was grown in 
trials at Geneva in 1884 at which time it was reported 
to be identical to Large White Lima with the exception 
of the seed color which was a deep dark red. The 
variety should not be confused with the Scarlet Lima 
mentioned in connection with Monstrous Lima — 
grouped in this monograph as a bush. This appeared 
at the same time, but was of unknown origin. These 
varieties are mentioned not because of their economic 
importance today, but for the historical interest, thereby 
suggesting a possible origin for some of the mottled and 
colored strains of lima beans. 

Salem. Refs. 8, 24, 41, 48, 91. Syns. Salem Im- 
proved, Salem Mammoth, Stokes Evergreen. The 
variety originated in Salem County, N. J., as a selection 
of Large White. It was listed by Johnson 8s Stokes as 



90 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



early as 1882 and undoubtedly was introduced by that 
firm on or before that time. When the variety was quite 
new it had the reputation of having foliage uniformly 
light green and pods almost twice the size of the ordinary 
lima. The present-day stock, however, does not ap- 
proach either ideal to any reasonable extent. It is quite 
productive and medium early, yet today the variety is 
very seldom listed by American seedsmen. At Geneva, 
it produced edible seeds in 102 days, the same as Car- 
penteria, King of the Garden, and Seibert's, 3 days later 
than Early Jersey, and 4 days earlier than Sunnybrook. 
The variety is most like Large White, differing chiefly 
in having larger, wider pods and slightly larger seeds 
that are occasionally inclined to be tinged with green. 
Foliage very similar to Challenger type. 

Plant large, climbing 5-8 feet, with a spread of 24-30 inches 
at the base. Vigorous, heavy producer over a moderately long 
bearing season. Thick stemmed, multi-branched. Foliage abun- 
dant, medium dull green with greyish tinge, veins often lightened, 
smooth, very slightly pubescent, medium thick and leathery. 
Leaflets medium large, broad (45s-4?4 x 3 3 s inches). Petioles 
moderately long. Flowers white. Peduncles long, moderately 
stiff. 

Pods moderately dark green in color. Sizes moderately long, 
quite broad and rather slender (4-5 x IJ4-IH x • 8 inches), contain- 
ing 3-4 seeds per pod. Shape flat, oblong-ovate in cross-section, 
moderately curved, saddle-backed, fairly regular, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge, and abruptly rounded 
at the end. Spur usually absent or very short, stout and straight. 
Suture, placental is rounded and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 21.1 x 1.45 x. 5 cm. (25 per oz.); long, broad 
reniform to nearly semicircular, flat, elliptical in cross-section; 
ends rounded, one slightly larger, broader than the other. Hilum 
medium, flat and incurved. Color dull white, occasionally tinged 
with pale green, quite distinctly marked with converging lines from 
the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface moderately smooth; 
quality excellent. 

Seibert's. Refs. 24, 41, 48, 88, 91. Syns. Seibert's 
Early, Seibert's Extra Early, Skillman's Pole Lima, 
Truckers Delight, Wilkey's Perfection Prize. This 
variety originated with a Mr. Seibert and was considered 
by some to be a large-podded strain of Jersey. It was 
introduced by D. M. Ferry & Co. in 1895. It has been 
and still is a leading pole lima. Seibert's as grown today 
has been recommended for home, market gardens, and 
canning alike. At Geneva the variety produced edible 
seeds in 102 days, the same as Carpenteria, King of the 
Garden, and Salem, 13 days later than Jersey, and 4 days 
earlier than Sunnybrook. Seibert's is mostly like Extra 
Early Jersey, being slightly later in season and having 
slightly larger pods that are inclined to twist from side 
to side. It is slightly larger seeded and more productive 
than Leviathan. It is also not unlike King of the 
Garden in plant and foliage, possibly a trifle darker 
with leaflets perhaps smaller. 

Plant large, climbing, 5-8 feet or better with a spread of 24-30 
inches at the base, vigorous, very productive over a moderately 
long season. Stems thick, multi-branched, both medial and basal 
in position. Foliage abundant, medium to dark green, occasionally 
light green, smooth, light veined, very slightly pubescent, medium 
thick and leathery. Leaflets medium size, moderately long in 
proportion to width at the base i.4 ,' * x 2 > _> inches). Petioles medium 
long. Flowers white, peduncles long, semi-limber. 

Pods dark green in color. Size long, broad, and quite plump 
(4, 1 r 5j : xl. , ,-l;,x^-H inches), containing 4 seeds per pod. 



Shape moderately flat, fairly broad oval in cross-section, slightly 
curved, somewhat twisted, straight backed, fairly regular, not 
crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge and rounded 
on the end. Spur very short, extremely stout and straight. Suture, 
placental is flattened and carpellary, moderately obtuse. 

Seeds large, 2.3 x 1.5 x .5 cm. (24 per oz.), long broad, sub- 
reniform, to nearly semicircular, flattened, elliptical thru cross- 
section; ends quite uniformly rounded. Hilum medium, fU .. Color 
dull white, usually tinged with pale green and very distinctly marked 
with dull grayish, converging lines from the hilum to the dorsal 
margin. Surface usually quite smooth. Quality excellent. 

Small White. Refs. 8, 9, 12, 13, 15, 24, 29, 48, 

63, 91, 93, 97, 98. Syns. Bushel Beans, Butter, Carolina, 
Carolina Sewee, Frost, Saba, Sieva, Sivy, Sky, West 
Indian, White. This lima represents both a type and a 
variety within a type. It is of South American origin 
but apparently was grown by the Indians of the northern 
continent for several centuries before the white man 
came. Its long historical background undoubtedly 
accounts for the many names associated with the type. 
It was listed by Thorburn as early as 1822 and undoubt- 
edly by others still earlier of which we have no record. 
It is offered today by a large proportion of American 
seedsmen, especially in the South. This variety has a 
distinct and important place in the crop schedule of 
southern growers, chiefly because of its extreme easi- 
ness. Although Small White is the earliest pole lima 
grown, it cannot be considered the most desirable since 
other varieties have better quality and, in the case of 
the potato-seeded types, greater yields. The small size 
of the seed and pod has been a decided handicap to the 
variety. It is extensively planted in the South, com- 
paring as favorably with pole limas as Henderson's Bush 
does with the dwarfs. 

At Geneva, Small White came into production in 
97 days, the same as Florida Butter, 4 days earlier than 
Willow Leaf, and 5 days earlier than Carpenteria. It is 
very much like Wood's Improved, differing chiefly in 
being earlier and in having smaller vine and pod, the 
latter being much straighter and free from twisting. 
The pods are also slightly larger than Henderson Bush, 
but the foliage is very similar. 

Plant large, tall; vigorous climber, 10-12 feet, with a spread 
of 21-24 inches at the base, moderately productive, early. Slender 
stemmed, quite green, multi-branched. Foliage abundant, very dark 
glossy green, small, stiff, light veined, pubescence absent, medium 
thick, not very leathery. Leaflets small, quite broad, not long, 
nearly top-shaped (3 %- 3% x 2j^ inches). Petioles moderately 
short. Flowers abundant, white. Peduncles long, limber. 

Pods moderately light green in color. Size short, moderately 
broad, and slender (3-3} ■> X JJ— fj x rs~ ?S inches), containing 
3 seeds per pod. Shape flat, moderately long oval in cross- 
section, straight, but slightly curved at the tip, straight backed, 
fairly regular, quite crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but not to 
the edge and rounded at the end. Spur short, slender, and straight. 
Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds small, 1.5 x 1.0 x .45 cm. (78-80 per oz.). Shape some- 
what triangular, flattened, elliptical thru cross-section; ends, one 
somewhat larger and broader than the other, both rounded, but the 
small end more abruptly. Hilum medium, flat and comparatively 
straight. Color chalky white, quite distinctly marked with con- 
verging veinlike lines from the hilum to the dorsal surface and also 
with a very narrow, indistinct, pale yellowish eye-ring. Surface 
moderately smooth. Quality fair to good. 

Sunnybrook. This variety, one of the later selec- 




FLORIDA 
SPECKLED 
BUTTER 





WILDER 



EARLY 

SMALL 
SIEVA POLE 



POD TYPES OF LIMA BEANS 



Natural size 1 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



91 



tions of the large-seeded limas, was originated by a 
private grower of the W. Atlee Burpee Seed Company 
as a selection from a variety then known as Parker Pole. 
It was introduced by the above-named company in 1922, 
but as yet is listed by comparatively few seedsmen. 
Sunnybrook as grown at Geneva was not earlier than 
the established varieties of its type, in fact one test 
gave it the latest maturing date of all. It produced on 
the average edible seeds in about 102 days, the same as 
Carpenteria and Seibert's, 2 days earlier than Ford's 
Mammoth, and 5 days later than Small White. In plant 
characteristics, the variety is similar to Challenger, with 
foliage about the same in size and shape but lighter green 
in color with very little if any gray. Pods are nearly the 
same size as King of the Garden, similarly marked along 
the margins, slightly more curved and usually a little 
earlier in season. 

Plant large, 8-10 feet, climbing, quite vigorous, productive 
over a moderately long season. Foliage abundant, light green, no 
grayish tinge, smooth or very slightly pubescent, medium thick and 
leathery. Leaflets medium large (4— t 1 s x 2} ■> inches); petiole mod- 
erately long. Flowers numerous, borne on long flower spikes, white. 

Pods light green in color. Size long, broad and quite slender 
(7-8 .' 2 x ljj x )i inches), containing 4-5 seeds per pod. Shape 
flat, long oval thru CToss-section, slightly curved and twisted, straight 
backed, quite regular, fairly crowded, moderately smooth, filled to 
the tip but not to the edge and tapering at the end. Spur very 
short, thick and straight. Suture, placental is somewhat rounded 
and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 2.1 x 1.3 x .8 cm. (27 seeds per oz.); shape broad 
oblong, nearly semicircular, inclined to be somewhat twisted occa- 
sionally, elliptical thru cross-section, moderately plump ends, 
moderately well rounded. Color dull dirty white, very distinctly 
marked with a converging veinlike pattern which is often raised, 
giving the surface a rather wrinkled or rough appearance. Quality 
good. 

Willow-leaved. Refs. 8, 9, 18, 24, 48, 91. Syns. 
Southern Willow-leaved Seivee Pole Lima. This unique 
lima originated as a sport of the Carolina type found 
growing wild in the South. It was introduced by 
Burpee in 1891, but later this honor was also claimed by 
Richard Frotscher, a seedsman of New Orleans, La., 
the predecessor of the Steckler Seed Company. The 
later organization used the variety name that appears 
above under the heading of synonyms. The Burpee 
introduction is, however, generally conceded to be more 
correct. The variety today is little known or planted. 
It is chiefly confined to the southern states, where its 
use is both culinary and ornamental. Because of its 
superior productiveness, it still is used by some growers, 
yet many consider its quality sadly inferior to others of 
the same size. It is considered an attractive ornamental 
vine and may be favorably compared to the bush type 
in this respect. The main attraction is undoubtedly the 
linear lanceolate or willow-leaf shaped leaves, although 
its fecundity is also considered an attractive feature. 
At Geneva edible seeds were produced in 101 days, 4 
days later than Small White and 1 day earlier than most 
of the large-seeded types. It may be best compared to 
Small White Lima, differing in being several days later 
in season, with decidedly longer and narrower pods, and 
somewhat smaller in vine. At Geneva it was also found 



to be less productive, although this characteristic seemed 
to vary in tests extending over a number of years. 

Plant large, 8-10 feet with a spread of 18-24 inches at the 
base, vigorous, moderately productive over a long period. Stem 
slender, many, semi-limber branches, both medial and apical in 
position. Foliage abundant, very dark glossy green, smooth, light 
veined, no pubescence, medium thick. Leaflets long and narrow, 
linear-lanceolate (5-5 ' ■_• x :i _i inches); petioles long, slender. Flowers 
numerous, small, white. Peduncle long and rather limber. 

Pods very dark green in color. Size short, moderately broad 



and slender (3—3 ' , x 



x xi inches), containing 3 seeds per 



pod. Shape flat, long, slender oval in cross-section, straight to 
occasionally slightly curved, straight backed, slightly constricted, 
not crowded, smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge and abrupt- 
ly rounded to square on the end. Spur short, moderately slender, 
and straight. Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 
Seeds small, 1.3 x .9 x .5 cm. (90-95 per oz.). Shape inclined 
to be somewhat triangular, elliptical thru cross-section, flat, occa- 
sionally moderately protuberant. Color chalky white, rather 
indistinctly marked with converging veinlike pattern and also with 
a very narrow yellowish eye-ring. Surface quite smooth. Quality 
fair to good. 

Wood's Improved. Refs. 41, 48, 91. Syns. King's 
Improved, Nichol's Medium Butter Pole Lima. This 
variety was introduced by T. W. Wood Seed Co., and 
has been listed by that company at least since 1893. 
Although the variety has been listed for a considerable 
period by a few seedsmen, it never has been widely 
listed. At Geneva Wood's Improved came into bearing 
in 99 days, 2 days later than Small White and 2 days 
earlier than Willow Leaf. Wood's Improved is of the 
Sieva or Small White type. Compared to this variety 
it was originally larger in pod and leaf and slightly later 
in season, although the first part of the statement 
cannot be said to be true with the present stock as grown 
at Geneva. As with other varieties, this one has become 
so intermingled that the same stocks have been sold 
under different names at various times and by various 
seedsmen. 

Plant large, climbing 8-10 feet with a spread at the base of 
24—30 inches. Vigorous, quite heavily productive over a moderately 
long season. Slender stemmed, multi-branched, both medial and 
apical. Foliage abundant, dark glossy green, smooth, pubescence 
absent, light veined, thick and leathery. Leaflets small, wide and 
short, 3 7, ,-3)1x2') inches; short tips, petiole medium long. 
Flowers numerous, white; peduncle long, semi-limber. 

Pods moderately light green in color. Size medium long, 
broad and slender (3 J ( —3 ' j x ? g-l fgx : . inches), containing 3— 4 seeds 
per pod. Shape flat, long slender oval thru cross-section, moderately 
straight, occasionally curled, straight backed, regular, fairly crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge, and uniformly rounded 
at the end. Spur short, slender and straight. Suture, placental 
flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds medium, 1.8 x 1.1 x .5 cm. (45-50 per oz.). Shape 
inclined to be somewhat triangular, altho occasionally some are 
nearly semicircular, longer and broader than Small White, elliptical 
to long oval in cross-section; ends one wider and either quite square 
or more uniformly rounded than the other. Hilum medium, flat. 
Color dull white, marked with a converging, veinlike pattern from 
the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface moderately smooth. 
Quality fair to good. 

DWARF VARIETIES 

Burpee. Refs. 1, 2, 7, 9, 17, 24, 25, 29, 39, 40, 41, 

47, 48, 49, 50, 62, 77, 91. Syns. Burpee's Bush, Burpee's 

Large Bush, Crenshaw Large White, Don Bush Lima, 

Elliott's Bush, Large White Bush, Mammoth Bush, 



92 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



True Bush, Willets Bush. This variety was said to have 
originated in 1883 at which time the finder, Ashur Palmer 
of Kennett Square, Pa., claimed to have found it as a 
single dwarf plant in a field of the Large White pole 
limas. Prompted very largely by the growing interest 
in the development of the dwarf type of the standard 
pole lima, Mr. Palmer brought his selection to W. Atlee 
Burpee, who after due care and selection increased the 
amount of stock seed and introduced the variety in 1890. 
Naturally, the supply was quite limited, thereby neces- 
sitating its distribution in rather small amounts which 
were sold at the attractive price of 75 cents per four 
beans. The Burpee was the first true large lima 
developed and should not be confused with Henderson 
which belongs to the small Carolina Sieva or Sewee 
group, or to the Kumerle or Dreer type, commonly 
known as the Potato lima. 

This variety has been and still is considered one of 
the leading bush limas. It is surpassed in its group 
only by the so-called improved strain introduced in 1907 
by Burpee as Improved Burpee. It is very productive, 
with high quality, large, attractive seeds. As to season, 
it may be considered too late to be used in the northern 
states for a full crop. At this Station it required 86 
days to mature a crop, 3 days later than Henderson and 
1 day earlier than Philadelphia. In plant characteristics 
it is more like Wonder than any other, being less bushy 
and more straggling in growth; pods slightly smaller 
and seeds somewhat broader and thinner, although 
the latter is not a distinctive difference. 

Plant medium to large, 14—20 inches high with an equal spread; 
a true bush lima, altho occasionally a semi-runner type is produced; 
always rather scraggly in appearance. Vigorous, thick stemmed, 
and heavily productive. Foliage abundant, light green to occasion- 
ally dull green. Surface smooth, light veined with practically no 
pubescence, thick and leathery in texture; leaflets large, broadly 
ovate; petioles medium to long. Flowers white, turning cream 
color with age, borne on very long, thick stalks. 

Pods borne intermediate and above the foliage; dark dul! 
green in color. Size long, very broad and slender (4J^— 5 x 1—1 }4 
x %~ig), containing 3-4 seeds per pod. Shape decidedly flat, very 
long oval in cross-section, slightly curved especially near tip, straight 
backed, regular, altho occasionally slightly constricted, not crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip and edge and abruptly rounded to truncate 
on the end. Spur very short, thick, stiff and sharp. Suture, 
placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 2. 2 x 1.4 x. 5 cm. (25 per oz.); oblong, broad, 
rather triangular, occasionally sub-reniform, slightly incurved at 
the hilum, very long oval thru cross-section, distinctly flattened; 
ends, one usually larger and broader than the other, both rounded, 
altho the broader end is more gradual. Hilum medium, slightly 
protuberant. Color dingy white marked with light grayish-brown 
converging vein-like lines from the hilum to the dorsal surface, 
greenish tinge may occur to some extent. Surface moderately 
wrinkled. Quality excellent. 

Burpee Improved. Refs. 48, 77. Syns. Enor- 
mous, Giant Bush, Giant Improved, Improved Large 
Bush, New Improved, Wilson Bush. According to W. 
Atlee Burpee, this variety was an entirely " new crea- 
tion " and not an improved selection. It was dis- 
covered in 1903 as a sport in a field of Challenger Pole 
limas and was introduced by the above-named seedsman 
in 1907. Since then, it has gradually gained in popu- 



larity; and today this variety is in more demand than 
Burpee Bush. 

In earliness, it comes between Henderson and 
Burpee's Bush, although very little difference, if any, 
exists between it and the latter. At Geneva it matures 
in 86 days, the same as for Burpee, 1 day earlier than 
Philadelphia, and 3 days later than for Henderson. 
The plant is somewhat more productive, and more erect 
with less tendency towards the scraggly growth such as 
Burpee manifests. The leaves and pods are slightly 
larger, the latter being somewhat straighter and more 
plump than Burpee Bush. The variety is gradually 
displacing the first large lima variety introduced, since 
it is a decided improvement over it. 

Plant medium to large, 16-22 inches tall with spread somewhat 
less; erect and not inclined to run or produce a scraggly growth to 
any extent. Vigorous, thick stemmed, very prolific. Foliage abun- 
dant, dark green, almost glossy. Surface very slightly crumpled, 
lightly veined, with practically no pubescence; thick and leathery 
in texture; leaflets large (4 7 ^ x 3}± inches), broadly ovate. Petioles 
medium to long. Flowers white, turning cream colored with age; 
borne on long, stout fruit stalks. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage, medium dark 
green in color. Size long, broad and moderately thick (3-5 J i x 1- 
IJi^'r'a inches), containing 4-5 seeds per pod. Shape flat, 
long oval thru cross-section, moderately curved, straight-backed, 
regular, filled to the tip but not to the edge and abruptly rounded 
to truncate on the end. Spur very short, thick and straight. 
Suture, placental is flat and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds large, 2.2 x 1.5 x .8 cm. (23 per oz.), broad oblong, 
somewhat sub-reniform, long oval thru cross-section, fairly plump, 
surface rather wrinkled or marked with converging corrugations, 
ends rounded. Hilum small, flattened. Color pale creamy white, 
few with a greenish white tinge, marked with dark shaded converging 
lines from the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface quite wrinkled. 
Quality excellent. 

Dreer's Bush. Refs. 17, 29, 39, 40, 41, 48, 57, 59, 
91. Syns. Challenger, Dallas, Dwarf Potato, Kumerle, 
Potato Bush, Salzer's Bush, Thorburn's Bush Lima. 
This variety was preceded by Kumerle or Thorburn 
Lima, which are identical. The stock of this variety 
originated from occasional dwarf forms of the Challenger 
Pole Lima from which it probably derived the name 
Challenger Bush, sometimes applied to it. The original 
stock found by J. W. Kumerle was introduced by J. M. 
Thorburn 8b Co. in 1889, two years before the variety 
now known as Dreer was brought before the public by 
Henry A. Dreer. The name Dreer has been retained and 
now is the most commonly used to designate the strain. 
It represents a type more widely known as the potato 
lima, having a much plumper and thicker seed than 
either the Henderson or the Burpee. It is reported 
to be especially adapted to light soils and dry seasons, 
of excellent quality, and often considered as a leader 
in productiveness, although variety tests at other 
stations show strains quite variable. It is probably 
more dependable in this respect than Burpee. At 
Geneva it proved to be one of the two latest bush 
varieties, coming into harvest in 90 days, the same as 
Dwarf Large White and 4 days later than Fordhook. 

The plant is quite different in growth habit from 
other bush forms. It is much more spreading and in- 
clined to produce more runners than Burpee. Pods 




i Natural size) 



HEAVY STEMMED BUSH LIMA — ENORMOUS EARLY 




(Natural size) 



SLENDER STEM BUSH LIMA — DWARF SIEVA 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



93 



are shorter, decidedly more plump, and thickened; seeds 
are thicker; leaflets more narrow, lighter colored, and 
apparently free from the glossy finish as suggested by 
Burpee. 

Plant medium to large (14-20 inches), with a spread of 15-18 
inches. Vigorous, stems quite stout, round. Branches large, 
coarse, spreading with numerous runners that bear the late crop 
of beans. Foliage abundant, medium grayish gTeen in color; smooth 
but not glossy; light veined, very slight amount of pubescence, 
medium thick; leaflets long and narrow (3J_>-6 inches), nearly 
lanceolate; quite distinct from Burpee. Petioles medium short. 
Flowers white, later turning cream colored; borne on short stalks; 
spikes short. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage; dark green in color. 
Size short, wide and plump l2? 4 -3,' L > x 1-1 * 5 x } o inches), con- 
taining 2— i seeds per pod. Shape moderately flattened, long oval 
thru cross-section, straight, slightly humpbacked, regular altho 
occasionally slightly constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and nearly to the edge and nearly truncate or square at the end. 
Spur very short, straight, thick, and pointed — quite inconspicuous. 
Suture, placental is flattened to slightly indented and carpellary, 
moderately obtuse. 

Seeds medium, 1.8 x 1.45 x .8 cm. (25 per oz.); short, broad, 
nearly semi-circular, long oval thru cross-section, moderately 
plump, ends uniformly rounded and occasionally somewhat trun- 
cate. Hilum large, flattened and occasionally incurved. Color 
pale creamy white, occasionally tinged with green and marked 
with darker shaded, converging lines from the hilum to the dorsal 
margin. Surface moderately wrinkled. Quality excellent. 

Fordhook. Refs. 48, 77. This bush lima was 
discovered by Henry Fish of Santa Barbara County, 
Calif. He found it as a single plant sport in a field of 
Challenger Pole limas in 1903, incidentally at the same 
time he also found the original plant of Burpee Improved. 
Fordhook was selected and developed by the W. Atlee 
Burpee Seed Company and introduced in 1907. Al- 
though Fordhook is of the same type as the Dreer or the 
Kumerle, it is not a selection from it as generally sup- 
posed. It is, however, an improved dwarf lima of the 
Kumerle or Potato Bush type. The variety is generally 
conceded to be a heavier cropper than its type fore- 
runner, the Dreer. This factor, together with its com- 
parative freedom from prostrate growth has given it an 
important place in the home gardener's as well as the 
market gardener's variety list. This characteristic has 
largely eliminated the pods that on the old type would 
have become discolored from being beaten and thrashed 
about by the wind and rain. 

In season, Fordhook is a few days earlier than 
Dreer. At Geneva, it requires 86 days to maturity, 4 
days earlier than Dreer and 2 days later than Henderson. 
This variety may best be compared to Dreer in type of 
plant growth. Fordhook is decidedly upright and erect 
and is amost entirely free from the willowy runners and 
limber side branches characteristic of Dreer. The foliage 
is heavier, leaflets somewhat broader and similar to the 
leaf of a large pole lirna, more leathery, and thicker. 
Pods and seeds are inclined to be slightly larger and 
more plump. All of these distinct improvements readily 
account for the prominent position now occupied by 
this variety. 

Plant medium tall, (16-20 inches) with a spread of 14-16 
inches; upright, moderately erect, occasionally inclined to be 
scraggly. Vigorous, highly productive over a period of two weeks. 
Stem stout, fairly stiff, numerous branches both medial and basal. 



Foliage abundant, dark green in color, smooth, light veined, very 
slight amount of pubescence, very thick and leathery, leaflets large, 
moderately long, 5 3 4 x 3 1 ., inches, inclined to be more broad at the 
base than Dreer. Petioles moderately short. Flowers white. 

Pods borne mostly below the foliage; medium dark green in 
color. Size moderately long, broad and plump (3-4?i x 1-1 ' , x 
J^-J-8 inches), containing 3-4 seeds per pod. Shape fiat, elliptical 
thru cross-section, straight to slightly curved, especially from side 
to side, straight backed, somewhat constricted and often distorted, 
not crowded, fairly smooth, filled to the tip and the edge and well 
rounded to almost square on the end. Spur very short, thick, 
straight and sharp. Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, 
obtuse 

Seeds large, 1.8 x 1.5 x. 8 cm. (21 per oz.); short, broad, 
nearly circular, oval thru cross-section, plump, surface somewhat 
wrinkled and depressed in places, uniformly rounded and occasion- 
ally truncate. Hilum large and slightly depressed. Color pale 
creamy white with a tinge of green (pale olive buff), indistinctly 
marked with converging lines from the hilum to the dorsal suture. 
Surface rough. Quality excellent. 

Henderson. Refs. 7, 9, 17, 24, 25, 29, 35, 39, 40, 

44, 46, 48, 49, 57, 59, 62, 63, 71, 77, 88, 91, 96. Syns. 
Dwarf Carolina, Dwarf Sieva, Earliest Bush, Kelsey 
Bush, Landreth's Bush Lima, Prolific Bush, Small 
White Bush. This variety is supposed to have had its 
origin about 1883 from a chance plant found growing 
along the road in the vicinity of Lynchburg, Virginia, 
by a passing negro pedestrian. It was afterwards 
grown by a local market gardener until 1885 when it 
was passed on to T. W. Wood & Sons. This firm 
grew it for two years and then sold the complete stock 
to Peter Henderson Company of New York in 1887. 
Henderson kept it to make further selections and to 
increase the stock and then offered it to the public in the 
spring of 1889 by the name it now bears. Henderson 
also introduced an improved strain of this variety in 
1907. According to Tracy, however, Improved Hender- 
son is identical with Wood's Prolific Bush Lima intro- 
duced by T. W. Wood & Sons in 1899. The latter is 
probably correct, inasmuch as Wood's Prolific Bush had 
its origin as a sport of Henderson's Bush several years 
before Peter Henderson introduced his " Improved 
Henderson." 

The Henderson fills an important place in the group 
of dwarf limas. Because of its earliness and distinct 
size and color, it is greatly admired by home gardeners 
and canners, especially the latter who depend chiefly 
upon this type for their product. It is also a desirable 
variety because of its hardiness, productiveness, and 
freedom from disease, an important consideration in the 
production of this crop. Its dependability as a sure 
cropper when other varieties of other types fail because 
of adverse weather conditions has given it the well- 
deserved place that it holds. Henderson came into 
harvest the earliest of all varieties of lima beans, in 84 days 
at Geneva, 6 days earlier than Dreer and 2 days earlier 
than Fordhook. It is one of the two most widely grown 
bush limas of this type. It is earlier by several days 
than Wood's Prolific and is most like this variety, differ- 
ing only in having slightly smaller seeds, smaller and less 
twisted pods, and less vigorous in general growth habit. 

Plant small, 12 inches or less with a spread of not more than 
15-16 inches; quite erect, bushy, almost entirely free from drooping 
runner-like side branches. Vigor fair to good, very early, produc- 



94 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



tive over a long period. Slender stemmed, numerous short branches, 
both medial and basal. Foliage abundant, very dark green, glossy, 
smooth, lightly veined, pubescence absent or very slight, moderately 
thick; leaflets small and moderately broad (3 3 i'^ x 2 5 s-2 3 4 inches), 
petioles moderately long. Stipules small. Flowers very abundant, 
white, turning cream colored with age. 

Pods borne mostly above plant; dark green in color. Size 
short, broad and slender (.2) <j-3M x %-% x A inches) , containing 3-4 
seeds per pod. Shape very flat, elliptical thru cross-section, slightly 
curved, straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and edge and rounded at the end. Spur very short, straight 
and stiff. Suture, placental is flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds small, 1.4 x 1.1 x. 45 cm. (90-95 per oz.) short broad, 
somewhat triangular, occasionally sub-reniform, quite straight at 
the hilum, long flat oval thru cross-section, distinctly flattened; 
ends, one usually broader and more gradually rounded than the 
other. Hilum medium, flattened. Color pale creamy white, over 
entire surface, marked with converging, irregular ridge-like pattern 
that indicates a rather rough surface in some instances and merely 
resembling an under pattern in others. Quality good to excellent. 

Jackson Wonder. Refs. 7, 24, 29, 41, 48, 49, 59, 

62, 72, 91. Syns. Jackson, Jackson Wonder Dwarf 
Sieva, Nicholson's Speckled, Old Florida Bush, Stecklers 
Calico Bush. This variety originated with Thomas Jack- 
son, an enterprising farmer of Atlanta, Ga. It is pri- 
marily a bean for the southern states and is supposed to be 
a very prolific dwarf strain of Speckled Lima or Small 
White. It was first introduced by D. Landreth & Sons in 
1888, but three or four years later was reintroduced by 
several other seed houses among which were Mark W. 
Johnson Seed Company and the Samuel Wilson Seed 
House. The Jackson is the hardiest of all Bush Limas, 
very productive and generally possessing most of the good 
qualities of the small-seeded limas, but because of the 
seed color can never become a popular leading variety. 
It is often termed a combination lima bean, inasmuch 
as when the pods are real young they may be used as 
snap beans in addition to their utility as a shell bean 
in the usual stage. 

At Geneva it was third earliest, coming into bearing 
in 87 days, 4 days earlier than Dreer and 3 days later 
than Henderson. In general plant characteristics it may 
be best compared with Henderson. It differs from this 
variety, however, in having slightly larger seeds that 
are irregularly spotted and streaked with dark brown to 
black; decidedly more spreading in habit, with a slight 
tendency towards running ; beans longer and more nearly 
like the Willow-leaved lima; pods may also be considered 
very similar to those of the latter named variety. 

Plant small to medium, 12-18 inches tall with a spread about 
the same or slightly larger. Quite spreading, almost sprawling 
growth, somewhat inclined to run. Slender-stemmed with the 
exception of the central stalk which is quite stout and erect: numer- 
ous semi-twining branched. Foliage medium, very dark green, 
glossy, smooth, lightly veined, apparently without pubescence and 
medium thick and leathery; leaflets small, long, almost lanceolate 
(4x2 3 j inches:, quite stiff and pointed, petioles numerous, medium 
short. Flowers very numerous, white. 

Pods borne well above the foliage; dark green in color. Size 
short, broad and slender (2? J: -3, 1 .| x 3 4 -, 7 s x } 4 ~ :i s inches), con- 
taining 3-4 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long oval to elliptical thru 
cross-section, straight to slightly curved, straight backed, regular, 
fairly crowded, smooth, filled to the tip and edge and rounded at 
the end. Spur very short, thick, straight and stiff. Suture, placen- 
tal is flattened and carpellary, acute. 



Seeds small, 1.5x.9x.45 cm. ("70—75 per oz.); somewhat 
triangular, long oval thru cross-section, distinctly flattened; ends 
wide and nearly square, the other quite abruptly rounded and very 
narrow. Hilum medium, slightly indented. Color light buff ipale 
ochraceous buffi under color, mottled and splashed with varying 
shades of blue-violet black to purplish black over entire surface. 
Some seeds are almost entirely covered with the darker shades. 
Quality fair to good. 

Monstrous. Refs. Aggeler & Musser, 1913. This 
large-growing bush lima originated in Orange County, 
Calif., and was introduced by Aggeler 8b Musser Seed 
Company of Los Angeles in 1908. Apparently it is not 
adapted for normal growth and development in the 
northern states. This is borne out by the fact that in 
the trials at Geneva no mature (ripe seed) pods were 
produced and also because the introducers suggest that 
its planting be limited to tropical and semi-tropical 
climates. The growth habit of this extraordinary bean 
is quite unique. At Geneva it produced numerous long, 
prong-like, stiff, stocky branches that if given a chance 
to develop under more suitable conditions would have 
grown into extremely long, vine-like extensions. Morris 
and Snow of Los Angeles report that under their condi- 
tions the vine-like branches have grown 10 to 15 feet 
long. The plant, therefore, should not be considered a 
true bush, neither is it a distinct pole, since it lacks the 
climbing characteristics. It may, however, be termed 
a very vigorous viner, quite unusual in any other variety 
of this species. 

Plant very large, spreading, often producing long runners in 
suitable environment. Extremely vigorous, high yielding over a 
comparatively long period of time. Stem large, stout and stocky, 
moderately long internodes, multi-branched both basal and medial 
in position. Foliage moderately abundant, dark green, dull, smooth, 
medium thick but not very leathery or tough; leaflets moderately 
large, broad (4j^x3J4 inches:, taper pointed. Flowers large, 
white. Peduncles medium to short. Pods large; long, very wide 
and thick ( 7 } j x 1 } 2 x 3 J 4 inches) , broad oval thru cross-section, 
usually distorted, ends rounded, tip distinctly short and thick. 
Seeds large, 16 to the oz., uniform, semi-circular, thick and white 
in color. 

Philadelphia. Ref. W. Atlee Burpee Cat. 1924, 
p. 74. This variety is one of the later distinctive develop- 
ments of the bush lima bean. It had its origin as the 
result of a cross between Fordhook and Wood's Prolific, 
and apparently has retained many of the good qualities 
characteristic of both parents. It was developed and 
introduced by the W. Atlee Burpee Seed Co. and marks 
the beginning of the introduction of improved varieties 
as the result of controlled crosses rather than chance 
sports or crosses that were formerly explained as the 
result of " Nature's methods." 

At Geneva, this variety produced marketable beans 
in 88 days, 1 day later than Wood's Prolific and 2 days 
earlier than Dreer. According to the introducer, how- 
ever, the pods mature fully as much as 7 days earlier 
than Wood's Prolific. In this variety the plant and foliage 
are very similar to Henderson Bush and Wood's Prolific. 
It resembles the latter especially in vigor, pods slightly 
larger and straighter, and containing four medium-sized 
beans more often than three; somewhat earlier and 
decidedly more productive than Dwarf Sieva. 




(Natural size) 



BUTTERFLY RUNNER 




WHITE DUTCH RUNNER 





Natural size) 



POD TYPES OF RUNNER BEANS 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



95 



Plant medium tall, 12-15 inches with a spread of 15-18 inches; 
bushy, entirely free from runners. Moderately vigorous, highly 
productive over a period of about two weeks. Stem moderately 
stout, internodes medium short. Branches fairly numerous, mostly 
basal in position. Foliage medium in amount, dark green, glossy, 
smooth, moderately thick and leathery. Leaflets medium size 

4 '• , x J t 3 inches), moderately long petioles. Flowers very 
numerous, white, later cream colored. 

Pods borne well above the foliage except the earlier ones that 
are fairly close to the ground; dark green in color. Size medium 
long, broad and moderately slender '3 1 _>^ :i 4 x 1 ' ^ x :i s inches), 
containing 3— 1 seeds per pod. Shape flat, long oval thru cross- 
section, straight, occasionally slightly curved or twisted from side 
to side, straight backed, regular, not crowded, smooth filled to the 
tip but not as well filled to the edge as Henderson and rounded at 
the end. Spur very short, straight and stout. Suture, placental 
is flattened and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds small, 1.5 x 1.0 x .5 cm. (55-60 per oz.V, moderately 
broad oblong, nearly semicircular, flattened, long oval to elliptical 
thru cross-section; ends uniformly rounded. Hilum medium, flat 
to slightly protuberant altho the hilar surface is somewhat indented. 
Color clear white, indistinctly marked with converging lines from 
the hilum to the dorsal margin. Surface moderately smooth. 
Quality excellent. 

Superba. This variety was introduced about 20 
years ago as a selection from Burpee's Improved by 
Robert Buist. As grown at Geneva it was very similar 
to the above-mentioned variety, differing chiefly in 
having larger pods, although this was not a consistent 
difference as some years they were not uniform in either 
shape or size. The plants showed a tendency towards 
a more sprawling, spreading growth than did plants of 
Burpee's Improved. In season, pods were produced at 
Geneva in 88 days, 1 day later than Burpee's Improved 
and 4 days later than Henderson. 

Plant medium tall, 15-18 inches with a spread somewhat 
greater, 18-24 inches. Inclined to produce a few runners on some 
plants, rather sprawling and spreading. Vigorous, moderately long 
producing season. Foliage abundant, medium green, with a slight 
grayish tinge, smooth, light colored veins, small amount of pubes- 
cence, moderately thick but not very leathery. Leaflets quite large 
(5x3 ?, 4 inches 1 , broad. Flowers white. 

Pods borne both above and below the foliage; light green in 
color, long, broad and thick (5xlJ4xJ-2 inches), containing 3-4 
moderately plump seeds. Shape oval thru cross-section, flat 
podded, slightly curved, straight backed, regular, not crowded, 
velvety smoothness, filled to the tip but not to the edge, rounded 
at the end, with a distinct tip that is short, straight and thick. 
Both placental and carpellary sutures are rounded. 

Seeds uniformly very large (2.4 x 1.8 x. 9 cm.), (21 per oz.) 
broad oblong, somewhat reniform, long oval thru cross-section, 
fairly plump, surface moderately smooth, occasionally marked with 
converging corrugations; ends rounded, altho one is slightly broader 
than the other. Hilum small, flattened but slightly incurved. 
Color pale creamy white, some inclined towards a slightly greenish 
tinge, indistinctly marked with dark shaded converging lines from 
the hilum to the dorsal margin. Quality very good. 

Willow-leaved Bush. Refs. 40, 41, 48, 91. This 
variety originated as a sport from Willow Leaf Pole and 
was introduced by W. Atlee Burpee in 1900. So far as 
we have been able to determine, the variety has never 
been grown at this Station, consequently such informa- 
tion that is presented is the result of compilation from 
data gathered from other sources. The variety is espe- 
cially adapted for the southern states, although favorable 
reports have also been received from some of the northern 
ones and from Canada. It has maintained the charac- 



teristic of all small limas, namely, that of early bearing. 
The foliage is of such a type as to make it desirable, at 
least to some, as an ornamental. As such it is used in 
southern gardens as a border plant. The bush form of 
Willow Leaf Lima is most like Henderson. It differs 
chiefly in the type of foliage in that the leaflets are 
decidedly lanceolate, being three to four times as long 
as they are wide. The color is slightly lighter, pods some- 
what more curved, longer, and more narrow. The dry 
seeds are slightly thicker and less angular. It is slightly 
less productive, since the bush itself is somewhat smaller. 
In season the two are practically the same. 

Plant small, quite uniform, 10-12 inches tall; about the same 
spread; somewhat open and spreading but not productive of runners. 
Moderately vigorous for its size, heavy bearer, with a comparatively 
long bearing season. Stems rather slender, branches fairly numer- 
ous, mostly basal in position. Foliage moderately abundant, dark 
glossy green, smooth, moderately thick and leathery; leaflets small, 
decidedly lanceolate, occasionally some are produced that are 
typically Henderson in type. Petioles medium short. Flower 
stalks very long. Flowers numerous, white. 

Pods borne prominently above the foliage; dark green in color. 
Size short, moderately broad and rather slender (2"s-3 x 3 4 - M 
x ] 4-i^ inches), containing 3-4 seeds per pod. Shape flat, elliptical 
in cross-section, straight backed, regular, fairly crowded, smooth, 
filled to the tip but not to the edge and rounded at the end. Spur 
very short, moderately stout, straight and sharp. Suture, placental 
is flattened to slightly rounded and carpellary, acute. 

Seeds small, 1.35 x. 9 x. 4 cm. (90-95 per oz.); nearly tri- 
angular, decidedly flattened, elliptical thru cross-section; one end 
wider and more uniformly rounded than the other, thereby suggest- 
ing the triangular appearance. Hilum medium, flattened. Color 
dull solid white over the entire surface and indistinctly marked with 
converging dark shaded lines radiating from the hilum to the dorsal 
margin. Surface moderately smooth. Quality fair to good. 

Wonder. Refs. 24, 41, 48, 72, 91. Syns. Dreer's 
Large Bush, Dreer's Wonder, New Wonder. This large 
bush variety originated as a selection of Burpee's Bush 
Lima and was introduced to the trade in 1898 by Henry 
A. Dreer. In 1901, Burpee offered another selection of 
Burpee's Bush which he called Quarter Century. Al- 
though these two seed stocks are undoubtedly very 
similar, they are not of the same source, inasmuch as 
the first was found by a Long Island grower and intro- 
duced by Dreer in 1898 and the second by a California 
grower and introduced by Burpee in 1901. Wonder 
undoubtedly was intended to satisfy the demand for an 
earlier strain of the Large Burpee. The introducer 
suggested that it was as much as 10 to 15 days earlier 
than Burpee's Bush. At Geneva, this has not been 
found to be true. It has also been reported that, although 
it was somewhat earlier, the quality when young was 
inferior, thereby suggesting that its reported earliness 
was illusory. At this Station it required 86 days to 
mature, just 1 day earlier than Burpee's Bush and 2 
days later than Henderson. No doubt under more 
favorable growing conditions than are obtained in the 
northern states, the variety would be a great improve- 
ment over its parent. Although predicted 25 years ago 
to replace largely the Burpee and Improved Burpee, 
today it is only listed by a very few seedsmen. The 
Wonder differs chiefly from Burpee's Bush in being more 
bushy, more compact in habit, and almost entirely free 



96 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



from runners. Pods and seeds are very similar and 
under some conditions are slightly larger. 

Plant moderately large, 15-20 inches tall with a spread of 
18-24 inches, quite bushy and stocky. Vigorous, heavily produc- 
tive, and moderately long in bearing. Stems stout with moderately 
short internodes, branches numerous, mostly basal in position. 
Foliage abundant, dark dull green, smooth, lightly veined, very 
slightly pubescent, thick and leathery; leaflets large, 4 J s~5 x 3}^j-3j-^ 
inches, very broad. Petioles moderately long. Flowers white, 
later turning cream colored. Peduncle rigid, medium long. 

Pods borne intermediate among the foliage; dark green in 
color. Size long, broad and slender (4— 4 J o x 1} | x ?s inches), 
containing 3 seeds per pod. Shape fiat, long oval thru cross- 
section, uniformly curved, straight backed, constricted, seeds fairly 
close together smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge and 
rounded to square on the end. Spur not prominent, very short, 
stout, and straight. Suture, placental is flattened, and carpellary, 
acute. 

Seeds large, 2.2 x 1.5 x .45 cm. (30 per oz.); long broad, semi- 
circular, extremely flat, elliptical in cross-section; ends uniformly 
rounded. Hilum medium, flattened to slightly indented. Color 
white, with a greenish tinge in some instances, marked with a very 
distinct dark shaded, raised converging lines from the hilum to 
the dorsal margin. Surface quite rough. Quality excellent. 

Wonderful. This variety should not be confused 
with Wonder, a very different type of bush lima. It 
was introduced in 1910 by Simon who said that it was 
an improved selected strain of Fordhook. In shape and 
size of pods and seeds the two are very similar. When 
introduced, however, the pods were supposed to be 
larger and broader than Fordhook, but at Geneva little 
of any difference existed between the two strains. It 
differs from Fordhook mainly in having a trifle larger 
seed that retains more of the green pigment when dry. 
The leaflets of Wonderful are shorter and broader, being 
about 5 inches long and 3J $ to 3} j inches wide at the 
base. The pods are borne well off the ground. The 
seeds are decidedly green when shelled. It has the same 
season as Fordhook, and is quite prolific. 

Wood's Prolific. Refs. 41, 48, 91. Syns. Hender- 
son's Improved Bush Lima, King's Improved Bush 
Lima, Prolific Bush Lima, St. Louis Seed Co.'s Improved 
Bush Lima, Tuckers Prolific Bush Lima, Wood's Bush. 
This strain of Henderson's Bush was obtained from a 
farmer near Richmond, Va., who stated that it was a 
sport from the latter variety. It was obtained and 
introduced by T. W. Wood, the originator of the 
Henderson, in 1899. It was meant to serve as a variety 
similar to Henderson, but with a larger pod and seed, 
together with increased vigor and quality. These factors 
were achieved to a moderate degree. The new selection, 
however, did not retain the earliness of Henderson. In 
the field the plants of Henderson and Wood's Prolific 
look almost identical. They differ in that Wood's Pro- 
lific is more vigorous, has larger plant, with slightly 
larger leaves, and possesses a greater spread. Pods are 
very similar but are slightly larger and less filled to the 
edge than Henderson. The seeds in the green-shell 
stage, at least, are a trifle larger. At Geneva, it required 
87 days to reach maturity, 3 days later than Henderson's 
and 3 days earlier than Dreer's Bush. 

Plant medium size, 12-15 inches tall with a spread of 15-18 
inches. Quite erect, bushy, entirely free from runners. Quite 



vigorous, intermediate in season, productive over a moderately long 
period. Inclined to be slender stemmed with numerous short 
branches both basal and medial in position. Foliage abundant, 
very dark, glossy green, smooth, lightly veined, pubescence absent 
or very slight, moderately thick; leaflets small to medium (4—4 ' j >.- 
4M-2K inches), petioles moderately long. Flowers white, numer- 
ous. Peduncles moderately short and rigid. 

Pods borne well above the foliage, dark green in color. Size 
moderately long, broad and quite slender (3' jj-4 x z /i~Y% x 3 s inches), 
containing 3-4 seeds per pod. Shape flat, elliptical in cross -sect ion, 
fairly straight altho there is a tendency for the pod to twist from 
side to side, straight backed, moderately constricted, fairly crowded, 
smooth, filled to the tip but not to the edge and square at the end. 
Spur short, straight and moderately slender. 

Seeds small to medium, 1.7 x 1.2 x .5 cm. (60-65 per oz.); 
somewhat triangular, occasionally broad sub-reniform, elliptical 
thru cross-section, flat to moderately plump altho not approaching 
the potato type in this respect; one end usually wider and more 
evenly rounded than the other. Hilum small and flattened but 
hilar surface slightly incurved. Color pale creamy white over entire 
surface, marked with a converging, slightly raised, radiating lines 
from the hilum to the dorsal margin that suggests a surface that 
is moderately rough. Quality fair to good. 

THE RUNNER BEANS 

This group, known more widely as flowering beans 
and botanically as Phascolus coccineus, represents a 
class that is of comparatively minor importance in this 
country, yet of sufficient popularity in England to 
justify the presence of a moderately large number of 
varieties. It is not the purpose of this monograph to 
report a complete varietal test of this group, neither does 
it suit our purpose to ignore the species completely. 
An attempt has been made to point out the leading 
variety types with as complete descriptions as possible, 
and to qualify these with minor accounts of such varieties 
that are merely of historical interest. 

The group as a whole is believed to be a native of 
South America. It is naturally a perennial, but under 
cultivated conditions of the more temperate climates it 
is an annual. This group of plants, while of some 
importance as a vegetable crop, is more esteemed as 
ornamental climbers on account of their rapid growth 
and the production of an abundance of large, often 
brightly colored flowers. Irish more completely describes 
the group as follows: 

" Plant twining, 10-15 feet high, minutely pubescent, in warm 
weather perennial with tuberous rootstocks, with us, annual and 
with branchy roots; stems slender. Leaflets broadly ovate or 
obliquely ovate, acuminate, inclining to triangular, 3—4 inches long, 
2 ' 2~3 ' ■> inches broad, quite smooth. Blossoms showy, in racemes 
longer than leaves, white, scarlet or variegated in different garden 
varieties. Pods green, oblong, cylindric, varying very much in 
length, straight or little curved, scabrous, tipped with short stout 
spur. Seed large, %-\ x /\ inch long, :! n— 's inch broad, }.i-?s inch 
thick, a little turned, variously colored. The cotyledons remain 
below ground when the seed germinates." 

Arabian Runner. This variety is of unknown 
origin. The term Arabian seems to be applied to several 
varieties of flowering beans, often with a modification 
which connects it with a particular variety. Available 
references are too meager, however, to establish definitely 
very much about either the history or accurate descrip- 
tion. In the annual report of the United States Com- 
missioner of Agriculture in 1865, the names Arabian 




(Natural size 



SCARLET RUNNER 




i Natural size) 



JUBILEE RUNNER 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



97 



White Flowered and Arabian Colored Runner appear. 
Later, in its 1909 catalog, the Iowa Seed Company lists 
Arabian Runner as similar to Scarlet Runner with white 
flowers striped with scarlet. This description does not, 
so far as is known, apply to any other known variety. 
The bi-color types have different solid-colored keels 
and wings, but they do not show the striped effect 
mentioned above. 

Aroostook Bush Lima. Refs. 48, 91. Syns. 
Aroostook Multiflora. This variety was introduced by 
George W. P. Jerrard of Caribou, Me., in 1905, who 
stated that the seed came from a customer. It has never 
been grown at this Station, but according to Tracy, it 
is decidedly the earliest of the eoecineus group. It 
mostly resembles Barteldes Bush Lima, differing prin- 
cipally in earlier season and smaller size. It may be 
just another strain of the old Indian Bean of the South- 
west referred to in the account of Barteldes Bush Lima. 

Barteldes Bush Lima. Refs. 7, 48, 91. Syns. 
Aztec, Bush Multiflora, California Butter, California 
Cream Butter, Grand Valley White Egg, Havai Supai, 
Mexican Lima. So far as we have been able to deter- 
mine, this variety had its origin generations ago. Bur- 
bank related that it was supposed to have been found 
in a sealed vase in an ancient Aztec dwelling in New 
Mexico. The evidence secured from various references 
and catalogues indicates that the above synonomy is 
probably correct. Since the variety has never been 
grown at this Station, the material presented is the 
result of a review of literature pertaining to it, therefore 
the veracity of these statements can neither be abso- 
lutely confirmed nor denied. Some samples indicate 
slight differences in some of the names written as syno- 
nyms, but they are all believed to be strains of an old 
Mexican or Indian bean — undoubtedly the one now 
known as Aztec. Like several so-called lima beans of 
the bush type, this is mis-named, since it does not belong 
either to the small- or the large-seeded limas, but to 
P. coccincus — the flowering bean. It cannot be con- 
sidered a true bush bean since it has a distinct running, 
spreading habit that forms a dense flat mass of runners 
over the ground around the central stem. 

The variety was formally introduced about 1890 by 
F. Barteldes & Co., who obtained the seed from Colorado. 
At present the variety is no longer listed under the 
above name, but the names Aztec and Grand Valley 
White Egg are used by some seed houses located in the 
Southwest. Barteldes Bush Lima is of a perennial 
nature in the Southwest, its probable nativity. In a 
test carried out by Bailey at Ithaca in 1895, the only 
one in the East of which we have a record, some of the 
plants developed a thickened perennial root, while others, 
grown from the same seed packet, produced distinctly 
fibrous roots. 

According to Tracy the variety is similar to Aroo- 
stook Bush Lima, differing chiefly in having a larger 
vine, seed, and pod, greater productiveness, and later 
season. Under suitable conditions it produces green 
shell pods much earlier than White Dutch Runner or 
the true bush lima. The snap beans are considered by 



some to be superior to the tough kidney varieties, such 
as Black Valentine and Davis Wax. 

Plant very large, thick stemmed, with long fruit branches, 
vining, vigorous, generally unproductive, altho this depends on 
environment. Foliage moderately abundant; leaflets large, dark 
green, smooth. Flowers numerous, large, white. 

Snap pods varying in size, usually long, much curved, flat, 
dark green with rough surface. Green shell pods borne in clusters 
well above foliage, about 5Ja-6 inches long, containing 4-5 seeds 
well separated in pods. 

Seeds very large, much thickened, very plump reniform, 
nearly circular, thru cross-section. Ends uniformly rounded. 
Hilum small, flat. Color glossy, white over the entire surface, the 
veining being either very light or absent. 

Bijou. This variety was grown and introduced by 
Watkins and Simpson in 1922. A year later it was listed 
by Fottler, Fiske, and Rawson in the United States and 
was grown in our tests sometime later. So far it has not 
met with great popularity. It is rather late and, as 
grown here, not very productive. It grew somewhat 
taller than specified by the introducer, however, occa- 
sionally reaching 6 feet. The seeds are only about half 
the size of Scarlet Runner, with pods two-thirds as long, 
averaging about 4} o inches. 

Plant semi -dwarf, quite vigorous, and fairly productive. 
Stem slender, inclined to have a brownish tinge below the nodes. 
Foliage medium abundant, moderately dark dull green, smooth, 
and medium thick. Leaflets small, short, and very broad (2jjx 
2 ] 4 inches). Flowers scarlet, quite numerous, large, borne on 
moderately long flower stalks. 

Pods dark dull green, good quality, stringless, brittle and 
fine texture. Size moderately short, rather narrow, but plump 



(4 J 2-5 x } 2-5 8 x 



inches) containing 5 seeds. Shape oval. 



ovate to cordate in cross-section, moderately curved, slightly hump- 
backed, regular not crowded, filled to the tip and edge, moderately 
smooth, and moderately rounded at the end. Spur medium short, 
thick and straight to slightly curved. Suture, placental slightly 
indented and carpellary, broadly acute. 

Seeds medium (1.7 x .9 x .65 cm.), containing 45-50 to the oz. 
Shape long broad reniform, somewhat flattened, ends uniformly but 
abruptly rounded. Hilum large, flattened. Color shining black 
mottled mostly on the ends and carpellary suture with a deep red 
(ox-blood red to carmine). 

Black Runner. Refs. 47, 56, 93, 94. Syns. 
Arabische schwarze, Black Seeded Runner, Black Stake, 
Haricot d'Espagne a grain noir, Phaseolus multiflorus 
niger, Stangenbohne. This appears to be one of the 
oldest varieties of which we have a direct record. Mar- 
tens wrote that it was described by Titus in 1654 who 
pictured it as one of the most beautiful and rarest beans. 
No record of its growth has been found in America with 
the exception of Irish's trials at the Missouri Botanical 
Garden. It is largely from his report that this meager 
description has been written. 

Plants climbing, branches reddish in color; flowers deep scar- 
let red. Pods flamed brownish red. Seeds large, %— 1 x ?s-}^ x 
J 3 x ? s inches in Europe, slightly smaller in this country. Coal 
black in color. 

Butterfly. Syns. Papilio. This is one of the bi- 
colored types. It was listed by Vaughan in 1908 and by 
Webber 8s Don in 1911, and was considered at that time 
to be equal to the standard old varieties in productive- 
ness and quality. It had the additional feature, in which 
it was to far surpass the others, of size and two-toned 



98 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



color of the flowers. These were very large with white 
wings and salmon rose standards. The variety was 
most like Scarlet Runner, differing chiefly in having less 
dense foliage, leaflets smaller and smoother surfaced, 
and the bi-colored flowers. 

Plant large, climbing, quite vigorous; moderately thick 
stemmed. Foliage moderately abundant, dark glossy green, 
smooth and quite thick. Leaflets medium size, very broad (2 1 _'-2 ' i 
x ] : ' , -2 1 ! inches). Flowers large, wings white, keel salmon and 
rose or orange borne on large flower stalks. 

Snap pods moderately dark green in color, fair quality, very 
firm fleshed, stringy and moderate amount of fiber, green shell pods 
medium long, 4-4 J ■> inches, 5 s--JJ inches wide and 3 >-';.> inch 
thick. Broad oval in cross-section, slightly curved, slightly crease 
backed, moderately constricted, not crowded, smooth, filled to the 
tip and edge and abruptly tapered at the end. Spur medium long, 
stout and slightly recurved. Suture placental, slightly indented 
and carpellary, rounded. 

Seeds medium to large (1.7 x 1.2 X .8 cm.) containing about 
21 to the ounce. Shape broad oblong, sub-reniform, plump, ends 
rounded, one more abruptly than the other. Hilum large, flattened. 
Color (grayish olive to deep grayish olive) over 85 per cent of the 
surface, mottled especially on the ends and sutures with light 
salmon iochracous-orange), marked with a narrow dark reddish 
brown (russet) eye-ring. 

Painted Lady. Refs. 28, 47, 56, 91, 98. Syns. 
Bicolor Runner, Bunt Bluhende Bohne, Haricot d'Es- 
pagne bicolor, Painted Runner, York & Lancaster. 
This is one of the bi-color varieties mentioned in the 
older literature. It apparently is of little importance 
in North America, since it was listed by comparatively 
few seedsmen. Tracy stated that it was listed at least 
since 1855, but Martens relates that the bi-color type was 
first described by Arrabida in his Flora of Rio Janeiro 
in 1827. The variety may best be described by com- 
paring it to Scarlet Runner. It differs from that variety 
in having smaller pods, flowers that have the lower 
petals pinkish white with the remaining portions scarlet, 
and seeds that are dark brown to black and mottled 
with creamy white, especially on the carpellary suture, 
ends, and portions of the sides. 

Scarlet Runner. Refs. 13, 28, 32, 47, 48, 52, 56, 

91, 93, 94, 97, 98. Syns. Carter's Champion, Champion 
Scarlet, Conqueror, Fire Bean, Haricot d'Espagne rouge, 
Mammoth, Ne Plus Ultra Runner, Red Giant, Scarlet, 
Scarlet Emperor. This variety is one of the oldest now 
in existence. According to Miller's Dictionary, he was 
the first to bring it into repute as a vegetable about 1750, 
although it had been known many years previous. In 
America it has been grown at least since 1800 and was 
listed by Thorburn as early as 1822. The variety, or at 
least the type it represents, is comparatively well-known 
in this country and is used both for an esculent and for 
ornamental purposes. The variety does not, however, 
assume the importance in this country that it does in 
Europe, especially the British Isles. Its culinary usage 
is confined to both snap pods and green shells and is 
generally accepted to take the place of limas that do not 
develop successfully in the cooler climates. In this 
country the variety develops to perfection in California, 



although favorable reports have been received from other 
sections. At Geneva our records show that the variety 
is good in both vigor and yield. There are many strains 
of this variety in cultivation, all of which are very 
similar in most respects, but differ slightly in length and 
width of pods and occasionally in number of days to 
maturity and size of dry seeds. Fundamentally, they are 
the same. Therefore, in this discussion, it should be 
borne in mind that the specific description to follow is 
more of a type description than one for a single variety. 
It should be suggested, therefore, that the synonomy of 
Scarlet Runner not be interpreted too literally, since 
some of the names represent strains that may be classi- 
fied in the above category. 

Plant large, growth 12-15 feet, climbing, rather open in habit; 
vigorous, moderately productive. Stem moderately thick, tinged 
with brownish purple. Branches medium in number, both basal 
and medial in position. Foliage abundant to almost dense, dark, 
glossy green, smooth, moderately thin. Pubescence very light or 
absent. Leaflets medium in size, moderately short but quite broad 
at the base (3?4 x3 3 s—3js inches), underside of veins tinged with 
purple. Flowers scarlet, very large, about 20^40 on each long 
flower stalk. 

Snap pods dark green in color; fair quality, moderately brittle, 
firm fleshed, somewhat stringy and rather coarse in texture. Size 
medium long to very long, broad, stout, 5 1 o-8 x Q-yg x s ..- ' _ j). 
Shape oval, broad ovate thru cross-section, slightly curved, straight- 
backed, quite regular, not crowded, moderately rough surface, 
filled to the tip and the edge and rounded at the end. Spur short, 
thick and decidedly curved or recurved. Suture, placental is flat 
to very slightly indented and carpellary, obtuse. 

Seeds very large (2.3 x 1.2 x .9 cm.), 20-25 per oz. Shape 
oblong reniform to sub-reniform, moderately plump, long oval thru 
cross-section. Ends uniformly well rounded. Hilum large, white, 
and flattened, occasionally somewhat incurved. Color shining 
black to violet black mottled with deep red (ox-blood to carmine) 
mostly on the carpellary suture and ends and to some extent on 
the sides. 

White Dutch Runner. Refs. 13, 28, 32, 47, 48, 
52,56,91,93,97,98. Syns. Chelsea, Childs Extra Early 
Lima, Dutch Runner, Haricot d'Espagne Blanc, Im- 
proved Prolific, Isbell's Perfect, Mammoth, Monarch, 
Oregon Pole Lima. This variety is another of the very 
old ones and apparently has been known nearly as long 
in this country as Scarlet Runner. Tracy states that it 
was listed by American seedsmen as early as 1825. The 
variety may be compared to Scarlet Runner which it 
resembles very closely, differing from that variety in 
having stems and leaf veins solid green and flowers and 
seeds pure white. Similar assertions may be made 
relative to minor strain differences as related in the 
discussion of Scarlet Runner. It is believed that the 
synonomy of this variety is parallel. Oregon Pale 
Lima is especially adapted to the Northwest and, 
although the name is apparently not listed by seed- 
houses elsewhere, it is here illustrated because of its 
importance in that region. As mentioned in Scarlet 
Runner, certain minor strain differences exist between 
the synonyms given, but inasmuch as the climate at 
this Station is not suited for the best development of 
this species, we have been unable to tell the exact dif- 
ferences with any degree of certainty. 



REFERENCES 



99 



REFERENCES 



8. 

9. 
10. 

11. 

12. 
13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 
IT. 
18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23! 
21. 



26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
31. 

33. 
36. 

37. 
38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 
41. 
4.1. 
46. 

47. 
48. 

49. 
50. 



Amer. Gard. 11:122. 1890. 

Amer. Gard. 15:370. 1893-94. 

Amer. Gard. 17:36. 1896. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. 108. 1889. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. 163. 1891. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. 149. 1892. 

Bailey, L. H. Cornell Univ. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 87:85-101. 

1895. 
Bailey, L. H. Cornell Univ. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 115:291-314. 

1896. 
Beach, S. A. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 69:251-258. 1894. 
Brose, M. C, Griffin, H. H., and Watrous, F. L. Colo. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:35-37. 
Brotherton, Wilburt, The Canner 60: No. 10, 102-104. 1925. 
Browne, D. J. Rpt. U. S. Patent Office 336-338. 1854. 
Burr, Fearing Jr. Field and Garden Vegetables of America, 

1863. 
Butz, G. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1891:152. 
Cassidy, J. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1888:138-141. 
Clayton, J. Ala. Canebrake Sta. Bui. 7:15-16. 1889. 
Clayton, J. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 51:7. 1893. 
Cooke, W. W., and Watrous, F. L. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

26:14-16. 1893. 
Country Gent. 4:202. 1855. 
Country Gent. 7:271. 1856. 
Country Gent. 39:120-137. 1874. 
Country Gent. +1:87. 1879. 
Country Gent. 43:149. 1880. 

Craig, J. Iowa Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 47:316-321. 1900. 
Crandal, C. S., and Huffington, M. J. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Bui. 26:14-16. 1894. 
Curtis, C. L. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 32:11-12. 1891. 
Curtis, C. L. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 38:15-17. 1892. 
Denaiffe & Sons, Les Haricots, Libraire Horticole, Paris. 1908. 
Du Pre, J. F. C. S. Car. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 10:1-8. 1893. 
Ferris, E. B. Afiss. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 131. 1909. 
Garcia, F. N. Mex. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1913:28-32. 
Gard. Chron. No. 15:236. 1842. 
Gard. Chron. No. 35:11 76. 1873. 
Garver, Samuel. U. S. D. A. Farmers' Bui. 1511:22-23. 

1927. 
Geismar, L. M. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Spec. Bui. 31:25. 1905. 
Gladden, H. P. and Hedrick, U. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

131:12-15. 1896. 
Goff, E. S. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1888:112-117. 
Griffin, H. H., and Watrous, F. L. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1890:210. 
Halstead, B. D. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1897:292-297. 
Halstead, B. D., and Kelsey, J. A. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1903:485^190. 
Halstead, B. D., Owen, E. J., and Shaw, J. K. N. J. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Rpt. 1904:512-526. 
Hansen, N. E. S. Dak. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 91:12-16. 1905. 
Hardenburg, E. V. Bean Culture, MacMillan Co. 1927. 
Hendry, G. W. Ca/iY. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 294:288-321. 1918. 
Hunn, C. E. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:313-317. 
Hunn, C. E. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:285-286; 

1891:474-475. 
Irish, H. C. Mo. Bot. Gard. Rpt. 12:81-163. 1901. 
Jarvis, C. D. Cornell Univ. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 260:150-255. 

1908. 
Jordan, A. T. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1898:158-174. 
Jordan, A. T. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1901:257-260. 



51. 

52. 
53. 
54. 

.">.■>. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 

60. 
61. 

62. 
63. 
64. 

65. 
66. 

67. 

68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 
86. 

87. 

88. 

89. 
90. 

91. 

92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99. 
100. 



Rural N. Y. 59:562. 
Rural N. Y. 68:474. 
Rural N. Y. 61:625. 
Rural N. Y. 73:1031. 



Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 35:476-185. 1909. 

Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 44:95-110. 1919. 

7our. Roy. Hort. Soc. 45:316-333. 1920. 

Mag. Hort. 11:158. 1848. 

Mag. Hort. 3:20. 1837. 

Martens, Geo. Die Gartenbohnen. 1860. 

Massey, W. F. N. Car. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 112:49-50. 1895. 

Mathews, C. W. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 50:52-53. 1894. 

Mathews, C. W., and Jordan, A. T. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

54. 1895. 
Newman, J. S. Ala. Canebrake Sta. Bui. 1:8. 1888. 
Newman, J. S., and Clayton, J. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 20:11. 

1890. 
Newman, C. L. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 34:122-123. 1895. 
Popenoe, E. A. Kan. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:131-151. 
Rane, F. W., and Hall, H. F. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 125: 

158-159. 1906. 
Rands, R. D. Jour. Agr. Res. 31:101-154. 1925. 
Richman, E. S., and Corey, A. F. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1889:99. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 10:9-10. 1891. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 20:15-20. 1893. 
Riemer, G. H. The Canner, 72: No. 10, 87-88. 1931. 
Rural N. Y. 47:763. 1888. 
Rural N. Y. 48:689-691. 1889. 
Rural N. Y. 58:690. 1899. 
1900. 
1909. 
1902. 
1914. 

Schneck, H. W. Cornell Univ. Ext. Bui. 176:14-24. 1928. 
Seed World 17, June 19:18. 1925. 

Smith, J. G. Nebr. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 12:26-28. 1889. 
Speth, G. Ga. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 11:41. 1891. 
Speth, G. Ga. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 14:79-80. 1891. 
Sprague, F. A. and Down, E. E. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Spec. 

Bui. 108. 1921. 
Stubbs, W. C. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 36 (2nd ser.):1241- 

1244. 1895. 
Taft.L. R. and Gladden, H. P.Mich.Agr.Exp.Sta.Bul.70:3-7. 

1892. 
Taft, L. R. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 79:3-7. 1893. 
Taft, L. R., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 190: 

123-126. 1901. 
Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Bui. 144:209-211. 1897. 
Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Bui. 153:230-232. 1897. 
TenEyck, A. M. TV. Dak. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1900 : 98-101. 
Tracy, W. W., Jr. U. S. D. A. Bur. Plant Ind. Bui. 21:19-53. 

1903. 
Tracy, W. W. Jr. U. S. D. A. Bur. Plant Ind. Bui. 109:1-173. 

1907. 
Vallejo, C. A. Wis. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1904:261-270. 
Vilmorin-Andrieux Les Plantes Potageres, 234-282. 1883. 
Vilmorin-Andrieux Vegetable Gardening. 1885. 
Waugh, F. A. Okla. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 22:6-9. 1894. 
Waugh, F. A. Okla. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 9:6-9. 1883. 
Wing, Henry B. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1882:89-119. 
Wing, Henry B. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1883:235-259. 
Woodbury, C. G. Canning Age 645, July. 1926. 
Woodward, Otis, Ga. Coastal Plain Sta. Bui. 6:46-48. 

1926. 



100 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



SUPPLEMENTARY LISTS OF VARIETY TRIALS 



Alwood, W. B. Va. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 60:67. 1896. 
Ayres, W. E. Miss. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 210:1-16. 1922. 
Beach, S. A. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1891:474-475. 
Beach, S. A. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1892:695-696. 
Blount, A. E. N. Mex. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 8:36. 1892. 
Buffum, B. C. Wyo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 22:75-76. 1895. 
Butz, George C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1888:137-141. 
Butz, George C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:170-171. 
Butz, George C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:159-160. 
Butz, George C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1893:123; 126-129. 
Coote, George. Ore. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 22:8-9. 1893. 
Coote, George. Ore. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 29:59. 1894. 
Corbett, L. C. W. V. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 49:473^177. 1897. 
Corbett, L. C. S. Dak. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 47:40^16. 1896. 
Fisher, R. W. Mont. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1906:144-146. 
Fisher, R. W. Mont. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1903:57-58. 
Geismar. L. M. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Spec. Bui. 28:20-35. 

1904. 
Halstead, B. D. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1906:248; 446^77. 
Hansen, N. E., and Thornbar, W. S. S. Dak. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

68:149-155. 1900. 
Jones, S. A. Nev. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:19-22. 
Judson, L. B. Idaho Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1904: 17-26. 
Maynard, S. T. Mass. Hatch Sta. Bui. 4:17-18. 1889. 



McNess, G. T. Tex. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 254:21-22. 1919. 
Minott, C. W. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1888:102-103. 
Minott, C. W. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:125-128. 
Minott, C. W. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:147-150. 
Morgan, H. A. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3 (2nd ser.): 55-56. 

1890. 
Morgan, H. A. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 22 (2nd ser.): 692. 

1893. 
Morris, O. M., Okla. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 56:12-13. 1901. 
Popenoe, E. A. Kan. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 19:198-201. 1890. 
Price, R. H. Tex. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 36:639-640. 1895. 
Rane, F. W. W. V. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 39:138-141. 1895. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1893:192-193. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 45:8-9. 1896. 
Stubbs, W. C. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 42 (2nd ser.) : 1511-1512. 

1896. 
Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Hedrick, U. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Bui. 120:17-18. 1895. 
Taft, L. R., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 196:87-89. 

1897. 
Taft, L. R., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 209: 103- 

122. 1899. 
Troop, James. Ind. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 38:18-19. 1892. 
Watts, L. R. Tenn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. V: No. 1, 13-14. 1892. 



INDEX 



Adsuki bean, 12 

African peanut, 8 

Aggeler St, Musser, seedsmen, Los Angeles, Calif., 94 

Alefeld, Friedrick, on common bean, 4, 14; on runner bean, 5 

Allan, J. H.. seedsmen, Sheboygan, Wis., 54 

Amphicarpa monoica, 8 

Ansley, A. H., Milo Centers, N. Y„ 60 

Apios ruberosa, 8 

Ascherson and Graebner, on common beans, 4 

Asparagus bean, 10, 11 

Associated Seed Growers, Inc., New Haven, Conn., 17, 35, 46 



B 

Bacterium flaccumfaciens, 15 
Bacterium pliaseoli, 15 
Bacterium vigneae, 16 

Bailey, L. H., on lima beans, 5, 17, 18, 97 

Barteldes, F. 86 Co., seedsmen, Lawrence, Kansas, 35, 97 

Bartlett, W. J., Oshawa, Canada, 61 

Bauhin, early mention of beans, 3 

Bean trials, 1 7 

Bentham, on lima beans, 5 

Blanco, on lima beans, 5 

Bliss, B. K. & Co., seedsmen, 87 

Bock 'Tragus I, early mention of beans, 3 

Bois, 30 

Bolgiano, J., seedsman, Baltimore, Md., 43 

Bona vi st bean, 10 

Bonnemain, M. Sec. of Etampes Hort. Soc, France, 43, 44, 54, 76, 83 

Brown, Alfred J., Seed Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., 17 

Buckbee, H. W., seedsman, Rockford, 111., 24 

Buist, Robt., seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 21, 54, 68, 95 

Bundo, 12 

Burbank, Luther, plant breeder, Santa Rosa, Calif., 80, 97 

Burkholder, W. H., bean breeder, U. S. D. A., 80 

Burlingame, D. G., bean breeder, Geneseo, N. Y., 6, 37, 76 

Burpee, W. Atlee Co., seedsmen, Doylestown, Pa., 6, 17, 34, 37, 

40, 41, 55, 56, 60, 64, 86, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95 
Burr, Fearing, Jr., 23, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 36, 39, 48, 50, 53, 69, 70, 

73, 74, 76, 77, 79, 84, 86 



Cadelium, 11 

Cajan, 9 

Cajan bicolor, 9 

Cajan cajan bicolor, 9 

Cajan lutens, 9 

Cajan striatus, 9 

Cajanum, 9 

Cajanum thora, 9 

Cajanus, 8, 9 

Cajanus cajan, 9 

Cajanus flavus, 9 

Cajanus indicus, 9 

Cajanus inodorutn, 9 

Callicysthus, 10 

Canavalia, 8, 9 

Canavalia ensiformis, 9 

Canavalia gladiata, 9 

Canavalia maxima, 9 

Caracalla, 11 

Carter, James & Co., seedsmen, London, Eng., 39, 47, 51, 53 

Carrier, Jacques, beans in the New World, 3 

Catjang, 10, 11 

Chickasaw pea, 1 2 

Childs, John L., seedsman, Floral Park, N. Y., 38, 71, 72 

Chiroko, 12 

Clark, O. W. St, Son, seedsmen, 43 

Classification and Keys, history of, 18 

Clementea, 8 

Clitoria sp., 8 

Clusius 'de l'Ecluse), beans in the New World, 3 

Colletotrichum lindemut hianum , 15 

Columbus, Beans in the New World, 3 



Common garden bean, classification of, 19; color inheritance, 15 
diseases, 15; early horticultural varieties, 5; floral structure, 15 
growth habit, 14; historical notes on, 4, 8; insect pests, 15 
pod characters, 15; pollination, 15; root system, 14; selection 
and breeding, 7,15; variation in, 14; varieties of: 

N B Names followed by see, such as Adams Stringless, refer to 
strains or stocks not available or to those which remained 
unplaced either as synonyms or as separate varieties. Names 
in Roman type, such as Abundance, are described in the text. 
Page numbers in bold face refer to pages opposite plate illus- 
trating the variety. Certain variety names occurring only 
on the illustrations represent types photographed before the 
present writers became associated with the work. Because 
of the difficulty in obtaining seed for further trial or the 
uncertainty in the application of the names these are not 
treated in the text. 



Abundance, 35, 72 

Adams Stringless, see Burpee's 
Stringless Green Pod, 38 

Admiral Togo Syn. of Currie 
Wax, 57, 72 

Admiral Wax Syn. of Cracker 
Jack Wax, 56 

Advance, 20 

Alexander Black Wax, 54 

Algerian Wax Pole Syn. of In- 
dian Chief, 33 

Algiers Syn. of Indian Chief, 6, 
31, 33 

Allan Imperial Wax, 54 

Alpha, 20 

Amber Wax, 54 

American Sickle Pole Syn. of 
Kentucky Wonder, 25 

American Wax, 31 

Andalusia, 31 

Arancano Syn. of London Hor- 
ticultural, 70, 72 

Arikara see Arikara Yellow, 75 

Arikara Yellow, 75 

Arlington Red Cranberry Syn. 
of Red Cranberry Pole, 73 

Aroostook, 75 

Asgrow Valentine, 35 

Asgrow Wax White Seeded, 54 

Asparagus Bean, see True As- 
paragus, 29 

Asperge, see White Asparagus, 
30 

Australian Tree, 75 



Baldwin Wonder Wax, 31, 73 
Banner Leafless Syn. of Navy 

Pea, 79 
Barbes, 35 

Barbes, see Digoin, 59 
Barteldes Stringless Green Pod, 

35 
Bayo, 75 

Bayo Chico, see Bayo, 75 
Bayo Medio Syn. of Pink, 80 
Beautiful Bean, 76 
Bell's Giant Stringless Green 

Pod Syn. of Giant Stringless 

Green Pod, 42 
Bell's Prolific Green Pod Syn. 

of Burpee's Stringless Green 

Pod, 37 
Besf Dwarf Syn. of Best of All, 

36 
Best of All, 36 
Best Yet Wax, 76 
Big Chief, 21 
Big Sioux Syn. of Concord Pole, 

71 



Bird-Egg Bean, 72 
Bismarck Great American 

Soup Syn. of Navy Pea, 79 
Bismarck Wax, 54 
Black Algerian Wax Pole Syn. 

of Indian Chief, 33 
Black Belgian, 36 
Black Creaseback Syn. of Ideal 

Market, 24 
Black-eyed China, 36 
Black-eyed Wax, 55 ' 
Black German, 32 
Black Prince, 36 
Black Scimitar, 21 
Black Seeded Kentucky Wonder, 

21 
Black Seeded Valentine Syn. 

of Black Valentine, 36 
Black Spanish Syn. of Turtle 

Soup, 83 
Black Speckled, 36 
Black Turtle Soup Syn. of 

Turtle Soup, 83, 80, 72 
Black Valentine, 36, 72 
Black Venezuelan, 81 
Black Wax Pole Syn. of Indian 

Chief, 33 
Blood Speckled, 37 
Blue Pod, 76 
Blue Butter Syn. of Purple Pod, 

47 
Blue Podded Pole. 21 
Bolgiano's New Wax Syn. of 

Refugee Wax, 67 
Bonnemain, 76 
Boston Dwarf, 55 
Boston Favorite, 73, 80 
Boston Market, 37 
Boston Market Pole Syn. of 

Red Cranberry Pole, 73 
Boston Market Pole Cran- 
berry, see Red Cranberry Pole, 

73 
Boston Marrow, see White 

Marrow, 84, 77 
Boston Marrow, Pea Syn. of 

Navy Pea, 79 
Boston Navy Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79, 77 
Bosron Pea Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
Bosron Small Pea Syn. of 

Navy Pea, 79 
Boston White Baking, 77 
Bountiful, 6, 37, 43 
Brazilian Running Bean Syn. 

of Turtle Soup, 83 
Breck's Boston Snap Syn. of 

Bountiful, 37 



101 



102 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Varieties of common bean — Con. 
Breck's Dwarf Horticultural 

Syn. of Boston Favorite, 73 
Breck's String and Shell Syn. 

of Best of All, 36 
Breck's Yellow Cranberry 

Syn. of Long Yellow Six 

Weeks, 44 
Brittle Wax, 6, 55, 60, 76 
Broad Mazagan, 75 
Broad Wax, 32 
Broad Windsor, 75 
Brocton Horticultural Syn. of 

Brocton Horticultural Pole, 

70 
Brocton Horticultural Pole, 70 
Brown Bunch Syn. of Tennes- 
see Green Pod, 52 
Brown Date Bean Syn. of New- 

inton Wonder, 47 
Brown Holland, 37 
Brown Sickle Syn. of Tennessee 

Wonder, 29 
Brown Speckled Valentine 

Syn. of Refugee, 49 
Brown Swedish, 76 
Buck's Improved Syn. of Low's 

Champion, 45 
Bulgarian, 21 
Burbank Navy, 77 
Burger Stringless, 21 
Burger's Green Pod, 77 
Burhngame, 76 
Burhngame Medium Syn. of 

Burlingame, 76 
Burhngame Medium Field 

Syn. of Burhngame, 77 
Burpee Kidney Wax, see Brittle 

Wax, 55 
Burpee's New Kidney Wax 

Syn of Kidney Wax, 64, 76 
Burpee's Saddleback Wax, see 

Burpee Stringless Green Pod, 

38, 72 
Burpee's Stringless Green Pod, 

6, 37, 42, 72 
Burpee White Wax, 6, 56 
Bushel Beans Syn. of Small 

White, 90 
Butter Stringless Syn. of Pro- 
lific Black Wax, 67 
Byers, 38 

Cabbage Wax Syn. of Crystal 
Wax, 57 

California, 32 

California Black Wax Syn. of 
Curne Wax, 57 

California Branch Syn. of 
Navy Pea, 79 

California Cream Syn. of Sul- 
phur, 82 

California Pinto, see Pinto, 81 

California Red Syn. of Red 
Mexican, 82 

California White Tree Syn. of 
Navy Pea, 79 

California Wonder Syn. of 
Navy Pea, 79 

Canada Yellow, 76 

Canadian Express, 39 

Canadian Wonder, 76, 72 

Cardinal Syn. of Red Cranberry 
Pole, 73 

Carmine Podded Horticul- 
tural Syn. of Dwarf Horticul- 
tural, 73 

Carmine Wax, 73 

Caseknife, 22 

Case Knife Runner Syn. of 
Caseknife, 22 

Celestial Wax Syn. of Currie 
Wax, 57, 72 

Chalandray, 39 

Challenge. Syn. of Challenge 
Black Wax, 56 

Challenge Black Wax, 56, 62 



Challenge Dwarf Black Wax 
Syn. of Challenge Black Wax, 
56 

Challenge Dwarf Black Wax 
Extra Early, see Challenge 
Black Wax, 56 

Challenge German Black Wax 
Syn. of Challenge Black Wax, 
56 

Chartres, 77 

Cherry Pole, 22, 72 

Chevrier, 39 

Chevrier vert Syn. of Chevrier, 
39 

Child's Horticultural, 71 

Chilean Syn. of Red Kidney, 81 

Chilean Field, 77 

Chilean Field Pea Syn. of Lady 
Washington, 79 

China Syn. of China Red Eye, 
77 

China Red Eye, 6, 77, 76 

China Yellow Syn. of Sulphur, 
82 

Chinese Dare Syn. of China 
Red Eye, 77 

Cholet, 39 

Clifford Wonder Syn. of Crack- 
er Jack Wax, 56 

Clifford New Early Wonder 
Wax Syn. of Cracker Jack 
Wax, 56 

Climbing Canadian Wonder 
Syn. of Climbing French, 22 

Climbing French, 22, 72 

Coco Blanc, see Lazy Wife, 25 

Colossal Stringless Green Pod 
Syn. of Giant Stringless Green 
Pod, 42 

Concord Pole, 6, 71 

Corn Bean, see Cutshort 6, 23 

Cornfield Pole Syn. of Cut- 
short, 23 

Corn Hill Pole Syn. of Cut- 
short, 6, 23 

Coscarron Chico Syn. of Navy 
Pea, 79 

Coscarron Medio, see Chilean 
Field, 77 

Cracker Jack Wax, 56 

Cranberry Bean, 70 

Crawford, see Robust, 82 

Cream Pole, 22 

Cream Valentine, 39 

Cream Wax Syn. of Golden 
Wax, 62 

Creaseback, 22 

Crimson Beauty, 73 

Crimson Flageolet, see Flageo- 
let Wax, 60 

Crosby Horticultural, 81 

Crystal Wax, 57 

Crystal White Wax Syn. of 
Crystal Wax, 57, 77 

Curious Pole, 23 

Currie Wax, 57 

Currie's Rustproof Black Wax 
Syn. of Currie Wax, 72 

Cutshort, 6, 19, 23. 7.5 

Cylinder Black Wax Syn. of 
Prolific Black Wax, 67 

Daisy Bell Syn. of Scotia, 28 

Dakota Soup, 77 

D'Alger Noir a Rames, see Al- 
giers, 31 

Dark Dun-colored, see Dun- 
colored, 39 

Date Wax, 58 

Dare Wax Syn. of Long Yellow 
Six Weeks, 44 

Davis Wax, 58, 61, 77 

Day's Leafless Medium, 77 

Delicious Giant, 23 

Delicious, 58 

Detroit Wax, 58, 76 

Di'c&enson's Yount Syn. Ore- 
gon Giant, 26 

Digoin, 59 



Don Carlos, see Southern Pro- 
lific, 28 
Dot Eye Syn. of Yellow Eye, 84 
Double Barrel, 59 
Drop Leaf, see Extra Early Six 

Weeks, 77 
Dun-colored, 39 
Dupont Navy, see Pilot Navy, 

80 
Dutch Case Knife Syn. of 

Caseknife, 6, 14, 22, 77 
Dwarf Abundance Syn. of 

Abundance, 35 
Dwarf Butter, 59 
Dwarf Caseknife, 39 
Dwarf Cimeter Syn. of Dwarf 

Caseknife, 39 
Dwarf Cranberry, see Dwarf 

Horticultural, 73 
Dwarf Early Fleuriel, 39 
Dwarf Early White Scimitar 

Syn. of Dwarf Caseknife, 39 
Dwarf German Wax Syn. of 

Long Dwarf German Wax, 65 
Dwarf Golden Wax Syn. of 

Golden Wax, 62, 76 
Dwarf Gray Market Garden, see 

Longfellow, 45 
Dwarf Green Pod Syn. of Red 

Kidney, 81 
Dwarf Horticultural, 6, 73 
Dwarf Indian Chief, 59 
Dwarf Mont d'Or, 59 
Dwarf Parisien, see Shah, 50 
Dwarf Red Cranberry Syn. of 

Low's Champion, 6, 45 
Dwarf Rice, 77 
Dwarf Russian, 39 
Dwarf Sabre Syn. of Dwarf 

Caseknife, 39 
Dwarf Soissons, 40 
Dwarf Speckled Cranberry, see 

Dwarf Horticultural, 73 
Dwarf Sugar Wax, 59 
Dwarf White Cranberry Syn. 

of White Marrow, 84 
Dwarf White Rice, see Rice, 28 
Dwarf Wren's Egg Syn. of 

Dwarf Horticultural, 73 

Earliest Green Pod Syn. of 

Best of All, 36 
Earliest Market Wax, 63 
Earliest of AH Syn. of Crease- 
back, 22 
Earliest of AH Wax Syn. of 

German Black Wax, 60, 72 
Early Carmine Podded Syn. of 

Dwarf Horticultural, 73 
Early Champion Syn. of Low's 

Champion, 45 
Early China Syn. of China Red 

Eye, 6, 77 
Early China Red Eye Syn. of 

China Red Eye, 77 
Early Dupont, see Pilot Navy, 

80 
Early Feejee Syn. of Feejee, 41 
Early Golden Cluster Wax 

Syn. of Golden Cluster, 32 
Early Golden Wax Syn. of 

Golden Wax, 62 
Early Harvest Wax, see Currie 

Wax, 57, 72 
Early Horticultural, 71 
Early Market, see Tennessee 

Green Pod, 52 
Early Marrowfat Pea Syn. of 

Navy Pea, 79 
Early Minnesota Syn. of Navy 

Pea, 79 
Early Mohawk, 6, 73 
Early Mohawk Six Weeks, 73 
Early One Thousand to One 

Syn. of Early Refugee, 40 
Early Pierpont, see Pilot Navy, 

80 
Early Pole Horticultural Syn. 

of Early Horticultural, 71 



Early Refugee, 40 

Early Six Weeks Syn. of Long 

Yellow Six Weeks, 44 
Early Speckled Red Valentine 

Syn. of Red Valentine, 48 
Early Stringless Wax, 59, 32, 56 
Early Wonder Red Valentine 

Syn. of Red Valentine, 48 
Early Yellow Princess Dwarf, 

see Long Yellow Six Weeks, 44 
Early Yellow Six Weeks, 6, 14 
Eastern Wonder Syn. of Ken- 
tucky Wonder, 25 
Eclair, 40 
Egg Harbor Syn. of Kentucky 

Wonder, 25 
Eldorado Syn. of Currie Wax, 

57 
Electric Tree Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
Elgin White Wax Syn. of Davis 

Wax, 58 
Emerald Beauty Syn. of Long- 
fellow, 44 
Emile, 40 
Emperor of Russia Syn. of 

Longfellow, 44, 37, 73 
Emperor William Syn. of 

Dwarf Caseknife, 39 
English Stringless Syn. of 

Giant Stringless Green Pod, 

42 
Epicure Wax Syn. of Refugee 

Wax, 67 
Erfurt Ruby, 71 
Eureka Syn. of Sulphur, 82 
Eureka Everbearing Wax Syn, 

of Refugee Wax, 67 
Everbearing, 40 

Everbearing Wax Syn. of Hod- 
son Wax, 63 
Everlasting, 59 
Everlasting Stringless, 24 
Ewing Prolific Pole Syn. of 

Creaseback, 22 
Excelsior Syn. of Early Refugee, 

40 
Excelsior Refugee Syn. of Early 

Refugee, 40, 73 
Extra Early Red Valentine, 

see Red Valentine, 48 
Extra Early Refugee Syn. of 

Early Refugee, 40, 73 
Extra Early Six Weeks, 77 
Extra Early Valentine, 69 
Extra Early Wax, 59, 61 

Fairfield Wonder Wax Syn. of 
Kidney Wax, 64, 76 

Faribault Kidney Wax Syn. of 
Kidney Wax, 64, 76 

Farquhar's Rustless Golden 
Wax Syn. of Keeney Rustless 
Golden Wax, 64, 76 

Fat Horse Syn. of Creaseback, 
22 

Fava, 75 

Feejee, 41 

Feltham Prolific, 40, 76 

Ferry's Golden Wax, see Michi- 
gan White Wax, 65 

Field's First Early Syn. of 
Tennessee Green Pod, 52 

Fill Basket Wax Pole, 32 

Fillbasket Wax, 60 

Firebrand, 74 

First Early, 43 

First in Market Syn. of Dwarf 
Caseknife, 39 

First of All Syn. of White 
Flageolet, 83 

Fisher Stringless Golden, 60 

Flageolet Wax Pole, 32 

Flageolet Wax, 60 

Flageolet Beurre aRarr.es, see 
Flageolet Wax, 32 

Flageolet a Grain Vert, 43 

Flageolet jaune, see Long Yel- 
low Six Weeks, 44 



INDEX 



103 



Varieties of common bean -Con. 
Flageolet Victoria, 40 
Fordhook Favorite, 6, 41, 12, 

Forellen, see Jacob's Cattle. 78 
French Asparagus, see True 

Asparagus, 29 
French Flageolet Syn. of White 

Flageolet, 83 
French Horticultural, 74 
French Kidney Syn. of Red 

Kidney, 81 
French Lead Pencil Syn. of 

Longfellow, 44 
French Market Syn. of Long- 
fellow, 44 
French Mohawk, 41 
French String Syn. of Black 

Valentine, 36 
French Stringless Syn. of 

Longfellow, 44 
French White, 77 
French Yard Long, see True 

Asparagus, 29 
Full Measure, 41, 37, 73 
Fuller's Black Wax Syn. of 

German Black Wax, 60 
Fuller's Ringlead Black Wax 

Syn. of German Black Wax, 60 
Fullmer, 41 

Galega, 42 

Garden Pride, 42 

Garland, 42 

Geneva Red Kidney, see Red 
Kidney, 81 

Genuine Cornfield Syn. of 
Scotia, 8 

Georgian Pole, 24, 72 

Georgia Monstrous Pole Syn. 
of Kentucky Wonder, 25 

German Black Wax Pole Syn. 
of Indian Chief, 33 

German Black Wax, 6, 60, 72 

Giant Forcer, 42 

Giant Horticultural Syn. of 
Horticultural Lima, 72 

Giant Podded Syn. of Giant 
Stringless Green Pod, 42 

Giant Red, 32 

Giant Red Wax Syn. of Flageo- 
let Wax, 60 

Giant Stringless Green Pod, 6, 42 

Giant Stringless Green Pod 
Valentine Syn. of Giant 
Stringless Green Pod, 42 

Giant Stringless Wax Syn. of 
Pencil Pod, 66, 72 

Giant Sword Pole, 77 

Giant Valentine, see Red Val- 
entine, 49 

Glory of St. Andrew Syn. of 
Masterpiece, 46 

Goddard Syn. of Eoston Favor- 
ite, 73 

Godding Dwarf Syn. of Boston 
Favorite, 73 

Gold Bean Syn. of Long Yellow 
Six Weeks, 44 

Gold Wax Improved Syn. of 
Grenell Rust Proof Wax, 62 

Golden Age, 61 

Golden Age New Stringless Wax, 
73 

Golden Andalusia Syn. of An- 
dalusia, 31 

Golden Beauty, 61 

Golden Butter Syn. of Golden 
Wax, 62 

Golden Butter Wax, 61, 76 

Golden Butter Syn. of Mont 
d'Or Pole, 34 

Golden Carmine Podded Horti- 
cultural, 73 

Golden Champion, 32 

Golden Cluster, 6, 32, 33, 77 

Golden Cranberry Syn. of Sul- 
phur, 82 

Golden Crown, 61 



Golden Drop Syn. of Sulphur, 

82 
Golden Eyed Wax, 61, 76 
Golden Harvest Cluster Wax, 72 
Golden Jersey Wax Syn. of 

Grenell's Rust Proof Wax, 62 
Golden Lazy Wife Syn. of An- 
dalusia, 31, 33 
Golden Pod, 33 
Golden Pod Kentucky Wax 

Syn. of Kentucky Wonder 

Wax, 33 
Golden Prize, 62 
Golden Queen Syn. of Hodson 

Wax, 63 
Golden Refugee, 42 
Golden Rust Proof Wax, 76 
Golden Scimitar Syn. of Pencil 

Pod, 66 
Golden Stringless Syn. of Val- 
entine Wax, 68 
Golden Wax, 6, 62, 76 
Golden Wax, see Old Style, 62, 

76 
Grand Sword Giant Syn. of 

Thuringen, 29 
Gray-seeded, 42 
Gray Seeded Kentucky Wonder, 

73 
Gray Succession, 43 
Great Northern, 77 
Great Western Syn. of White 

Marrow, 84 
Green Gem, 43, 76 
Green Podded Forcing, see 

Wonder Forcing, 53, 72 
Green Seeded Dwarf French, 77 
Green-seeded Flageolet, 43 
Green Soissons, 43 
Green's Golden German Wax 

Syn. of Grenell Rust Proof 

Wax, 62 
Grenell's Improved Golden 

Wax Syn. of Grenell Rust 

Proof Wax, 62, 76 
Grenell's Improved Kidney Pod 

Golden, 62 
Grenell Rustless, 6 
Grenell Rust Proof Wax, 62, 76 
Grenell Stringless, 43 
Griswold Everbearing, 63 
Ground Bird, 73 
Gumkler, see Canadian Wonder, 

76 

Half Moon, 6 

Hallock Tree Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
Hampden Syn. of King Horti- 
cultural, 72 
Hardy Wax, 63, 73 
Haricot Don Carlos Syn. of 

Southern Prolific, 28 
Haricot lilas vert Syn. of 

Refugee, 49 
Haricot Riz Syn. of Rice, 28 
Haricot rond blanc commun 

Syn. of Navy Pea, 79 
Harlequin, 71 
Hatt New, 78 
Hemisphere Syn. of Concord 

Pole, 71 
Hidatsa Red, 78, 72 
Hodson Green Pod, 43, 37 
Hodson Long Podded Wax 

Syn. of Hodson Wax, 63 
Hodson Silver Wax Syn. of 

Hodson Wax, 63, 61 
Hodson Stringless Green Pod, 

see Burpee's Stringless Green 

Pod, 37 
Hodson Wax, 63, 73 
Hodson Wax Rust Proof Syn. 

of Hodson Wax, 63 
Holmes Improved Sickle Syn. 

of Tennessee Wonder, 29 
Holstein, 24 
Holsteiner Bohne, see Holstein, 

24 



Hoover Special, 43 

Hopkins Red Valentine, see 

Red Valentine, 48, 73 
Horticultural Bush, 73 
Horticultural Cranberry Syn. 

of Crosby Horticultural, 71 
Horticultural Cranberry Pole 

Syn. of London Horticultural, 

72 
Horticultural Lima, 72 
Horticultural Pole Syn. of 

London Horticultural, 6 
Horticultural Pole Syn. of Red 

Cranberry Pole, 73 
Horticultural Wax, 63 
Housewives Delight Syn. of 

London Horticultural, 72 
Hubbardston, 78 
Hundredfold, 44 
Hundred for One Syn. Hun- 
dredfold, 44 
Hungarian Butter, 33 
Hunter, see Robust, 82 

Ice Bean Syn. of Crystal Wax, 

57 
Ideal Market, 24, 63 
Ilsenburg, 44 
Imperial Dwarf Kidney Syn. 

of White Kidney, 84 
Imperial Golden Wax Syn. of 

Allan Imperial Wax, 54 
Imp. Prolific Syn. of Navy, 79 
Imperial White, 77, see White 

Kidney, 84 
Imperial White Seeded Wax 

Syn. of Jones Stringless, 63 
Imperial Yellow Eye Syn. of 

Yellow Eye, 84, 77 
Imported Bayo, see Bayo, 75 
Improved Black Wax Syn. of 

Prolific Black Wax, 67, 62, 72 
Improved Butter Wax Syn. of 

Kidney Wax, 64, 76 
Improved Challenger Syn. of 

Challenger, 86 
Improved Davis White Wax 

Syn. of Davis Wax, 58 
Improved Dwarf Golden Wax, 

76 
Improved Early Fulmer, see 

Warwick, 53 
Improved Early Red Valen- 
tine, see Red Valentine 48, 81 
Improved Goddard, see Boston 

Favorite, 73 
Improved Golden Wax Syn. of 

Grenell Rust Proof Wax, 62, 

76 
Improved Kidney Wax Syn. of 

Kidney Wax, 64 
Improved Longsword, see 

White Model, 53 
Improved Prolific Black Wax, 

see Pencil Pod, 66 
Improved Prolific Tree Syn. of 

Navy Pea, 79 
Improved Red Kidney Syn. of 

Red Kidney, 81 
Improved Refugee Syn. of 

Refugee, 49 
Improved Robust Syn. of Ro- 
bust, 82, 8(1, 77 
Improved Rust Proof Golden 

Wax Syn. of Grenell Rust 

Proof Wax, 62, 76 
Improved Six Weeks Syn. of 

Bountiful, 37 
Improved Southern Prolific 

Syn. of Kentucky Wonder, 25 
Improved Stringless Green 

Pod Syn. of Giant Stringless 

Green Pod, 42 
Improved Tree Syn. of Navy 

Pea, 79 
Improved White Navy Syn. of 

Navy Pea, 79 
Improved Yellow Eye Syn. of 

Yellow Eye, 84, 77 
Indian Bean, 78 



Indian Chief Syn. of Big Chief, 

21 
Indian Chief, 6, 14, 33 
Intermediate Horticultural 

Syn. of Dwarf Horticultural, 

73 
Intestin, 24 
IsbelTs Earliest Syn. of Best 

of All, 36 
Isbell's New Golden Butter 

Wax Syn. of Golden Wax, 62 
Italian Pole, 72, 73 
Ivory-Pod Wax, 6, 33 
Ivory-pod Wax Syn. of Crystal 

Wax, 57 
Ivory Pod Wax Kentucky, see 

Kentucky Wonder Wax, 33 

Jacob's Cattle, 78, 76 

Japan, 24 

Japan Giant Butter Syn. of 

Thuringen, 29 
Jaune de Perreaux, see Master- 
piece, 46 
Java, 24 
Johnson Bean Syn. of Soldier, 

82 
Jones Green Pod, 44 
Jones Stringless, 63 
Jones Stringless Round Pod 

Syn. of Jones Stringless, 63 
Jordan Self-drier, 25 
Jubilee Wax Syn. of Golden 

Age, 61 
July Pole Syn. of Creaseback, 

22 
June Bean Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 

Keeney's Refugee Wax Syn. 

ot Refugee Wax, 67 
Keeney's Rustless Golden Wax, 

6, 64, 76 
Keeney's Stringless Green 

Refugee, see New Stringless 

Green Pod, 46, 73 
Keeney's White Seeded Refu- 
gee Wax Syn. of Asgrow Wax 

White Seeded, 54 
Kentucky Wonder, 25, 23 
Kentucky Wonder Wax, 33, 72 
Kidney Shaped Wax Pole Syn. 

of Baldwin Wonder Wax, 31 
Kidney Wax, 64 
Kidney Wax Syn. of Wardwell 

Kidney Wax, 69 
Kidney Wax Round Pod Syn. 

ot Brittle Wax, 55 
King Horticultural, 72 
King of the Earlies Syn. of 

Black Valentine, 36 
King of the Earliest Syn. of 

Black Valentine, 36 
King of the Greens, 44 
King of the Wax, 65 
King of Wax Syn. of Flageolet 

Wax, 60 
Knickerbocker, 44 
Knife Blade Syn. of Tennessee 

Green Pod, 52 

Lady Washington, 79 
Landreth's Extra Early 

Stringless Red Valentine, 

see Red Valentine, 48 
Landreth's Mammoth-seeded 

Golden Wax Mohawk, see 

Mohawk Wax, 66 
Langport Wonder, 44 
Large Marrow, see White Mar- 
row, 84 
Large Red Kidney Syn. of Red 

Kidney, 81 
Large White Syn. of Lady 

Washington, 79 
Large White Marrow, see White 

Marrow, 84, 77 
Large White Dwarf, see White 

Flageolet, 83 



104 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Varieties of common bean — Con. 

Late Prolific Refugee Syn. of 
Refugee, 49 

Late Refugee Syn. of Refugee, 
49 

Lazy Wife, 6, 25, 77 

Lemon Pod, 65 

Leopard Wax, 65 

Liancourt, 22 

Light Dun-colored, see Dun- 
colored, 39 

Lightning Syn. of Feejee, 41 

Lightning Early Red Valen- 
tine Syn. of Red Valentine, 48 

Lima Wax, 65 

Little Dwarf Navy Syn. of 
Navy Pea, 79 

Little Gem Syn. of Early Hor- 
ticultural, 71 

Little Wonder Syn. of Early 
Horticultural, 71 

Livingston's Pencil Pod Wax 
Syn. of Refugee Wax, 67 

London Horticultural, 6, 72 

Long Dwarf German Wax, 65 

Long Podded Bacon-bean, see 
Burger Stringless, 21 

Long Podded Princess, see 
Princess, 27 

Long White Canterbury, see 
White Kidney, 84 

Long Yellow Six Weeks, 6, 44 

Longfellow, 44, 37 

Longfellow Stringless Greenpod, 
73 

Low's Brocton Syn. of Brocton 
Horticultural Pole, 70 

Low's Champion, 6, 45, 72 

Lucas Bean, see Purple Pod, 27 

Lyonnaise, 45 

Lyonnaise Wax, 65 

McCaslan, 25, 77 

McCasland, see McCaslan, 25 

McKenzies Matchless String- 
less Green Pod Syn. of Bur- 
pee's Stringless Green Pod, 37 

McMillan's Prolific Syn. of 
Best of All, 36 

Magpie Syn. of Superlative, 51, 
45, 76 

Mahogany Red, 79 

Maine, 79 

Maine Frost -proof, 79 

Mammoth Syn. of White 
Dutch Runner, 98 

Mammoth Carmine Podded 
Horticultural, see King Hor- 
ticultural, 72 

Mammoth Kidney-shaped 
Syn. of Ford's Mammoth, 87 

Mammoth Podded Horticul- 
tural Syn. of King Horticul- 
tural, 72 

Mammoth Stringless Green 
Pod Syn. of Giant Stringless 
Green Pod, 42 

Mammoth Stringless White 
Pod Syn. of Royal Purple 
Wax, 67, 68 

Manchurian Bayo, see Bayo, 
75 

Manchurian Pinto, see Pinto, 
81 

Marblehead Horticultural, 74 

Market Wax, 65 

Marrow Pea Syn. of Navy Pea, 
79 

Marrowfat Syn. of White Mar- 
row, 84 

Marrowfat Pea Syn. of Navy 
Pea, 79 

Marshall, 26 

Marvel of Paris, 45 

Marvellous, 77 

Maryland White Pole Syn. of 
Lazy Wife, 25 

Masterpiece, 46 

Mastiff Golden-Pod, 34 

Matchless, 46 



Maule Butter, 65 

Maule's Improved Butter 
Wax, see Brittle Wax, 55 

May Queen Syn. of Black 
Valentine, 36 

Medium Imperial Syn. of Red 
Cranberry Pole, 73 

Mexican Syn. of Red Mexican, 
82 

Mexican Lima Syn. of Bartel- 
des Bush Lima, 97 

Mexican Pinto, see Pinto, 81, 
73 

Mexican Red Syn. of Red 
Mexican, 82, 73 

Mexican Spotted Red, see 
Bayo, 75 

Mexican Tree Syn. of Navy 
Pea, 79 

Michigan Improved Syn. of 
Robust, 82 

Michigan White Wax, 65 

Midsummer Long Pod Wax 
Syn. of Flageolet Wax, 60 

Miller's Early Golden String- 
less Syn. of Valentine Wax, 68 

Milliken's Wax Syn. of Ward- 
well Kidney Wax, 69 

Missouri Prolific Syn. of Ken- 
tucky Wonder, 25 

Missouri Wonder, 26, 22, 73 

Missouri White Cornfield Syn. 
of Creaseback, 22 

Mobile Pole Syn. of Crease- 
back, 22 

Mohawk, 6, 14, 46 

Mohawk Wax, 66 

Molasses Face Syn. of Yellow 
Eye, 84 

Monarch Wax, 66 

Monarch Wax Syn. of Sure 
Crop, 68 

Afonsrer Podded Southern 
Prolific Syn. of Southern 
Prolific, 28 

Monster Stringless Wax, 66 

Montreal Bean, see Long Yel- 
low Six Weeks, 44 

Mont D'Or Pole, 34, 73 

Moro Syn. of London Horti- 
cultural, 72 

Mother's Favorite Syn. of 
Oregon Giant, 26 

Mottled Cranberry, 73 

Mottled Prolific, 26 

Mountain Syn. of White Mar- 
row, 84 

Mug Wump Syn. of King Hor- 
ticultural, 72 

Nain blanc Quarantain, see 
French White, 77 

Nancy D Syn. of Missouri Won- 
der, 26 

Nancy Davis Syn. of Scotia, 28 

Nancy Davis Cornfield Syn. of 
Scotia, 28, 73 

Napoleon Stringless, 66 

Navy Syn. of Navy Pea, 79 

Navy Pea, 79 

Negro Long-pod, 46 

Nettle-leaved Canterbury, 79 

New Baltimore Stringless 
Wax Syn. of Kidney Wax, 64 

New Champion Syn. of Low's 
Champion, 45 

New Golden Lazy Wife, see 
Andalusia, 31 

New Green Bush Bean No. 1 
Syn. of Bountiful, 32 

New Rose, see Canadian Won- 
der, 76 

New Round Pod Kidney Syn. 
of Brittle Wax, 55 

New Stringless Green Pod, 46 

New Sure Crop Stringless 
Wax Syn. of Sure Crop, 68 

New Wax, 67 

New Wonder Syn. of Wonder, 
95 



New Zealand Runner Kidney 
Bean Syn. of King Horticul- 
tural, 70, 72 

Newington Wonder, 47 

Newington Wonder Syn. of 
Giant Stringless Green Pod, 
42 

Norfolk Wax Syn. of Currie 
Wax, 57 

Norwood Stringless Syn. of 
Giant Stringless Green Pod, 42 

Nova Scotia Marrow, 79, 77 

Noxall Pole Syn. of Missouri 
Wonder, 26 

October Pole Syn. of Concord 

Pole, 71 
Ohio Wax Pole Syn. of Ken- 
tucky Wonder Wax, 33 
Olathe Prolific, 26 
Old Fashioned Yellow Eye, 

see Yellow Eye, 84 
Old Homestead Pole Syn. of 

Kentucky Wonder, 25 
Old Homestead Wax Syn. of 

Kentucky Wonder Wax, 33 
Olds Late Stringless Wax, see 

Stringless Wax, 68 
Oliver Field, see White Kidney, 

84 
Oregon Giant, 26; see Delicious 

Giant, 23, 73 
Osborn, 47 

Page's Extra Early, 40 

Paraguay, 80 

Pearl Syn. of Red Cranberry 

Pole, 73 
Pencil Pod Black Wax, 6, 60, 72 
Pencil Pod, 66 
Perfection Stringless Syn. of 

Full Measure, 41 
Perfection Wax Syn. of Flageo- 
let Wax, 60 
Perfectly Straight Round Pod 

Syn. of Longfellow, 44 
Perpetual, 47, 57 
Perry Marrow, 80, ~i, 77 
Pheasant-eye, 47 
Phenomenon, 27 
Pilot Navy, 80 
Pink, 80 
Pink-eye, 81, 77 
Pink Eye Wax, 66 
Pink-eyed Wax Syn. of Golden 

Wax, 62 
Pinto, 81, 73 
Plentiful, 72 
Pod Spot Proof Syn. of Currie 

Wax, 57 
Portland Fancy Syn. of Navy 

Pea, 79 
Pottawottomie, 74 
Powell Prolific, 27 
Predome, 27 
Pride of Iowa Syn. of Full 

Measure, 41 
Pride of Newton Syn. of Long 

Yellow Six Weeks, 44 
Prince, 47 
Princess, 27 
Princess Rose, 27 
Prizewinner Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
Prodommet Syn. of Predome, 

27 
Profusion Wax Syn. of Refugee 

Wax, 67, 66 
Prolific Black Wax, 67, 72 
Prolific Everbearing Wax Syn. 

of Davis Wax, 58 
Prolific German Black Wax 

Syn. of Prolific Black Wax, 67 
Prolific Green Pod Syn. of 

Burpee Stringless Green Pod, 

37; Syn. of Missouri Wonder, 

26 
Prolific Pickler, 47 
Prolific Stringless Syn. of Full 

Measure, 41 



Prolific Tree Syn. of Navy Pea , 

79 
Prosperity Wax Pole Syn. of 

Kentucky Wonder Wax, 33 
Prudhomme Syn. of Predome, 

27 
Purple Flageolet, see Flageolet 

Wax, 60 
Purple Pod, 27, 47 

Quarter Century, see Wonder, 

95 
Quatre-a-quatre, see White 

Asparagus, French White, 30, 

77 
Queen, 34 
Queen of France, 28 

Rachel, 48 

Ran Caguino Syn. of Pink, 80 
Red Syn. of Red Mexican, 82 
Red Canada Syn. of Canadian 

Wonder, 76 
Red Cranberry Dwarf Syn. of 

Low's Champion, 45 
Red Cranberry Pole, 6, 73 
Red Cutshort Syn. of Cutshort, 

23 
Red Eye Syn. of China Red Eye, 

77 
Red Face, 81 
Red Flageolet, see Flageolet 

Wax, 60 
Red Flageolet, 48 
Red German Syn. of Flageolet 

Wax, 60 
Red Indian Syn. of Hidatsa 

Red, 78 
Red Kidney, 81 
Red Marrow, 82 
Red Mexican, 82 
Red Orleans, 28 

Red Podded Dwarf Horticul- 
tural Syn. of Boston Favorite, 

73 
Red S/ssons Syn. of Sunshine 

Wax, 34 
Red Spanish Syn. of Red 

Mexican, 82 
Red Speckled, 74 
Red Speckled Syn. of Cutshort, 

23 
Red Speckled Oval Seeded 

Syn. of Cutshort, 23 
Red Swiss, see Fullmer, 41 
Red Turkey Syn. of Red Kid- 
ney, 81 
Red Valentine, 48 
Refugee, 6, 49, 73 
Refugee Wax, 67 
Reliance, 48 
Rennie d'or Syn. of Flageolet 

Wax, 60 
Rennie's Stringless Wax Syn. 

of Flageolet Wax, 60 
Reuter's Ideal Market, see 

Ideal Market, 24 
Rhode Island Butter Pole 

Syn. of Missouri Wonder, 26 
Rhode Island Caseknife Syn. 

of Dwarf Caseknife, 39 
Rhode Island Creaseback, see 

Missouri Wonder, 26 
Rhode Island White, 49 
Rice, 28 
Rod Roy Syn. of Long Yellow 

Six Weeks, 44, 49 
Robin's Egg Syn. of Sulphur, 82 
Robust, 82 
Rocky Mountain, 28 
Rogers Stringless Green Pod. 12 
Rojo Syn. of Red Mexican, 82 
Ronceray, 28 
Rosa Syn. of Pink, 80 
Rose Syn. of Canadian Wonder, 

76 
Rouge d'Orleans, 82 
Round American Kidney Syn. 

of Canada Yellow, 76 



INDEX 



105 



Varieties of common bean — Con. 

Round Pod Kidney Wax Syn. 
of Brittle Wax, 55, 56 

Round Pod Prolific Black Wax 
Syn. of Pencil Pod, 66 

Round Pod Refugee Syn. of 
Refugee, 49 

Round Pod Six Weeks. 13 

Round White Princess Syn. of 
Navy Pea, 79 

Round Yellow Six Weeks, 6, 50 

Routledge Giant Syn. of Ore- 
gon Giant, 26 

Royal Corn, 28 

Royal Dwarf Kidney Syn. of 
White Kidney, 84 

Royal Purple Wax, 67 

Royal Wax Syn. of Royal Purple 
Wax, 67 

Royal White Kidney, 77 

Ruby Dwarf Horticultural, 81 

Ruby Horticultural Syn. of 
Dwarf Horticultural, 73 

Rust Proof Golden Wax Syn. 
of Grenell Rust Proof Wax, 
62 

Rust Proof Intermediate Horti- 
cultural, 74, 81 

Saddle Back Wax Syn. of Ger- 
man Black Wax, 60, 69 
St. Louis Perfection White. 

see Burger Stringless, 21 
Salinas Red Syn. of Red Mexi- 
can, 82 
Salmon Colored Kidney Syn. 

of Pink, 80 
Salzer's Earliest Wax Syn. of 

Allan Imperial Wax, 54 
Salzer's Tree Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
San Domingo, see Lazy Wife, 

25 
Satisfaction, 50 
Scarlet Flageolet Wax, see 

Flageolet Wax, 60, 72 
Scarlet Orleans Syn. of Rouge 

d'Orleans, 82 
Scarlet Swiss Syn. of Swiss 

Crimson, 29 
Schultz's Stringless Green 

Pod Syn. Burpee's Stringless 

Green Pod, 37 
Schwill's Wonderful Wax Pole 

Syn. of Kentucky Wonder 

Wax, 33 
Scipio Pole Syn. of London 

Horticultural, 72 
Scotia, 28, 23, 73 
Self-seasoning Syn. of Sulphur 

82 
Shah, 50 
Shipper's Favorite Syn. of 

Best of All, 36 
Siberian Pinto, see Pinto, 81 
Silver Refugee, see Golden 

Refugee, 42 
Silver Wax Syn. of Crystal Wax, 

57 
Simmer's Early Giant Wax 

Syn. of Flageolet Wax, 60 
Sion House Syn. of Best of All, 

36 
Sir Joseph Paxton, 50 
Small Navy Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
Small White Ekaterinoslav, 

see White Lental, 84 
Snowflake, 82 
Soldier, 82, 76 
Solitaire, 50 

Sophie Syn. of Lazy Wife, 25 
Southern Cornfield, 77 
Southern Prolific, 28, 22, 72 
Sparrow's Egg, see Dwarf Hor- 
ticultural, 73 
Speckled Cranberry Syn. of 

London Horticultural, 72 



Speckled Cranberry Bush 
Syn. of Dwarf Horticultural, 
73 
Speckled Wax, 68 
Spotted Amber.see Dwarf Hor- 
ticultural, 73 
Spotted Mexican, see Pinto, 81 
Stanton Syn. of White Flageo- 
let, 83 
State of Maine Improved Yel- 
low Eye, 77 
Straight Creaseback Syn. of 

Creaseback, 22 
St. Fiacre, 34 

Stringless Forcer Syn. of Bur- 
pee's Stringless Green Pod, 37 
Stringless Green Round Pod 
Syn. of Burpee's Stringless 
Green Pod, 37 
Stringless Kidney Wax Syn. of 

Kidney Wax, 64, 76 
Stringless King of the Wax, 56, 

76 
Stringless Refugee Wax, 62 
Stringless Wax, 68 
Stringless Wonder Syn. of Bur- 
pee's Stringless Green Pod, 37 
Stringless Yellow Pod Syn. of 

Royal Purple Wax, 67, 61! 
Striped Creaseback Syn. of 

Scotia, 28 
Striped Sickle,see Mottled Pro- 
lific, 26 
Sulphur, 82, 77 

Summer's Canadian Wonder 
Syn. of Canadian Wonder, 76 
Sunrise, 50, 53, 15 
Sunshine Wax, 34 
Sunshine Bush Wax Syn. of 

Golden Eyed Wax, 61 
Superb Early Forcing, see 

Chalandray, 39 
Superlative, 51 
Sure Crop, 68, 61, 72 
Sure Crop Stringless Wax 
Syn. of Sure Crop, 6, 68, 61, 72 
Sutton's Dwarf Sugar Syn. of 

Best of All, 36 
Sutton's Perfection Syn. of 

Longfellow, 44 
Sutton's Plentiful Syn. of 

Bountiful, 37 
Swedish Syn. of Brown Swed- 
ish, 76 
Swiss Crimson, 29 

Tait's White Wax Syn. of 
Davis Wax, 58 

Tall German Black Wax Pole 
Syn. of Indian Chief, 33 

Tampico Syn. of Turtle Soup, 
83 

Taylor Green Pod, 51 

Tender and True Syn. of 
Climbing French, 22 

Tendergreen, 51 

Tendergreen New Stringless, 73 

Tender Pod, 51, 72 

Tennessee Green Pod, 52 

Tennessee Wonder, 29, 73 

Tewksbury Syn. of Rustproof 
Intermediate Horticultural, 74 

Tewksbury Dwarf Horticul- 
tural, see French Horticul- 
tural, 74, 73 

Texas Pole Syn. of Kentucky 
Wonder, 25 

Texas Prolific Wax Syn. of 
Kentucky Wonder Wax, 33 

Thorburn's Refugee Wax, see 
Refugee Wax, 67 

Thousand-fold Dwarf White, 83 

Thuringen, 29 

Tom Thumb, 52 

Transylvanian Butter, 29 

Tree Syn. of Navy Pea, 79 



Triumph Syn. of Triumph of 
the Frames, 52 

Triumph of the Frames, 52 

Trout Bean, see Jacob's Cattle, 
78 

True Asparagus, 29 

Turc Syn. of Best of All, 36 

Turkish Date Bean, see Refu- 
gee, 49 

Turtle Soup, 6, 14, 83 

Twentieth Century Dwarf 
Wax, see Brittle Wax, 55 

Two Colored China Dwarf 
Syn. of China Red Eye, 77 

Unique, 52 
Unrivalled Wax, 68 

Valentine Wax, 6, 68, 73 

Vanguard Syn. of Cracker Jack 
Wax, 56 

Veitch's Climbing French 
Syn. of Climbing French, 22 

Veitch's Early Wonder, see 
Wonder Forcing, 53 

Veitch's Forcing, see Chalan- 
dray, 39 

Venezuelan Syn. of Turtle 
Soup, 83 

Ventre de Biche, 52 

Ventura Wonder Wax Syn. ot 
Davis Wax, 58 

Victoria, 53 

Vienna, 53 

Vineless Marrow, 83 

Vineless Marrow Syn. of Nova 
Scotia Marrow, 80 

Violet Flageolet Wax, see Fla- 
geolet Wax, 60, 72 

Virginia Cornfield, 30 

Ward Prolific, 30 
Wardwell's Delicious Wax 
Syn. of Wardwell Kidney 
Wax, 69 

Wardwell Kidney Wax, 6, 69, 
60,76 

Warren, 53, 72 

Warwick, 53 

Wax Case Knife Syn. of Fill- 
basket Wax, 32 

Webber Wax Syn. of Cracker 
Jack Wax, 56 

Well's Red Kidney, see Red 
Kidney, 81, 80, 72 

White Advancer, 53 

White Algerian Syn. of Golden 
Cluster, 32 

White Asparagus, 30 

White Branching Sugar Syn. 
of Navy Pea, 79 

White Canterbury Syn. of 
White Flageolet, 83 

White Case Knife Syn. of Case- 
knife, 6, 22 

White Cherry Syn. of Lazy 
Wife, 25 

White Cranberry, 30 

White Cranberry Syn. of Lazy 
Wife, 6, 25; Syn. of White 
Marrow, 84 

White Creaseback Syn. of 
Creaseback, 22, 77 

White Date Bean Syn. oi White 
Kidney, 84 

White Egg Syn. of White Mar- 
row, 84 

White Field Syn. of Burlin- 
game, 76 

White Flageolet, 83 

White Flageolet Wax, 69 

White Kidney, 6, 84, 77 

White Kidney Wax Syn. of 
Wardwell's Kidney Wax, 69 

White Lental, 84, 80, 77 



White Lyonnais, 14, 53 

White Lyonnaise, see Lyon- 

naise Wax, 14, 65 
White Mammoth, see White 

Marrow, 84 
White Marrow, 6, 84 
White Marrowfat Syn. of 

White Marrow, 84 
White Medium Syn. of Burlin- 

game, 76 
White Model, 53 
White Pea Syn. of Navy Pea, 

79 
White Seeded Butter, 30 
White Seeded Green Pod, 77 
White Seeded Kentucky 
Wonder Syn. of Burger 
Stringless, 21 
White Seeded Refugee Wax, 76 
White Seeded Stringless 
Green Pod Syn. of Fordhook 
Favorite, 41 
White Sickle, 30 
White Soissons, 30 
White Stringless Wax, 69 
White Swiss Syn. of White Fla- 
geolet, 83 
White Valentine, see Red Va- 
lentine, 49 
White Wax, 69, 6«, 77 
White Wax Dwarf, 76 
White Wonder Syn. of White 

Sickle, 30 
White Zulu, 35 
White's Early Syn. ot Feejee, 6, 

41 
White's Prolific Syn. of Mis- 
souri Wonder, 26 
Wild Goose, 31 

Willing' s Pride Syn. of South- 
ern Prolific, 28 
Willmot, 53 
Wisconsin Tree Syn. of Navy 

Pea, 79 
Wonder, see Robust, 82 
Wonder, 53 
Wonder Forcing, 53 
Wonder of France, 54, 45, 77 
Woodward, 31 

Worcester Syn. of King Horti- 
cultural, 72, 73 
Worcester Mammoth, see 

Caseknife, 22 
Wren's Egg Syn. of London 
Horticultural, 72 

Yard Long, see Tree Asparagus, 
29, 72 

Yellow Bountiful Syn. of Sure 
Crop, 68 

Yellow Cranberry, 6, 31 

Yellow Egg, see Long Yellow 
Six Weeks, 44 

Yellow Eye, 6, 84, 77 

Yellow-eyed China Syn. of 
Yellow Eye, 84 

Yellow Indian, see Arikara Yel- 
low, 75 

Yellow-Podded Princess, 70 

Yellow-Podded White, 35 

Yellow Princess, 70 

York Dwarf Wax Syn. of Gold- 
en Wax, 62 

York Red Kidney, see Red 
Kidney, 81 

York State Medium Syn. of 
Burlingame, 76 

York State Wax Syn. of Golden 
Wax, 62 

Yosemite, 70, 72 

Yosemite Mammoth Bush 
Bean Syn. of Yosemite, 70 

Yosemite Wax, 70 

Yura Mon Syn. of Pink, 80 

Zebra, 31 



106 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Cook, A. T., seedsman, Hyde Park, N. Y., 27 

Cornut, on runner beans, 5 

Cowpea, 10, 12; varieties of: Black Eye, 11; Extra Early Black 

Eye, 11; White, 11 
Cryptophaseolus, 8 

Currie Bros., seedsmen, Milwaukee, Wis., 57 
Cytisus cajan, 9 

D 

Daily, John W., Falling Waters, West Virginia, 41 

Dallwig, W. E., seedsman, Milwaukee, Wis., 30 

Darch & Hunter, seedsmen, London, Canada, 66 

Davis, Eugene, Grand Rapids, Mich., 58 

Davis, Nancy, Hazard, Kentucky, 26 

Day, Wm. H., 77 

De Candolle, on history of beans, 3; on common beans, 4; on lima 

beans, 5 
De Combles, on runner beans, 5 
De l'Ecluse (.Clusius), early mention of beans, 3 
De l'Obel ' Lobelius), early mention of beans, 3 
De Soto, beans in the New World, 3 
De Vaca, Cabeca, beans in the New World, 3 
Denaiffe, Les Haricots, France, 21, 22, 24, 30, 32, 33, 36, 38, 40. 42, 

45, 48, 52, 70 
Descriptions of varieties, 1 7 
Diaporthe phaseolorum, 16 
Dibble, E. F., seedsman, Honeoye Falls, N. Y., 77 
Dipogon, 9 

Dodoens iDodoneus), early mention of beans, 3 
Dolichos, 8, 9 
Dolichos acinaciformis, 9 
Dolichos albus, 10 
Dolichos amoenus, 10 
Dolichos angularis, 13 
Dolichos benghalensis, 10 
Dolichos bicontortus, 10 
Dolichos catjang, 11 
Dolichos cultratus, 10 
Dolichos curtissii, 10 
Dolichos ensiformis, 9 
Dolichos gladiatus, 9 
Dolichos lablab, 10 
Dolichos lignosus, 10 
Dolichos lu bin. 11 
Dolichos martinensis, 10 
Dolichos melanophthalmus, 10 
Dolichos monachalis, 10 
Dolichos oleraceus, 10 
Dolichos pugioniformis, 9 
Dolichos purpureas, 10 
Dolichos sesquipedalis, 11 
Dolichos sinensis, 10 
Dolichos soja, 8 
Dolichos tetraspermus, 10 
Dolichos transquebaricus, 11 
Dreer, Henry A., seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 32, 42, 65, 68, 86, 95 



Edible dry beans, 74 
Erythrina indica, 8 
Everitt, J. A. Seed Co., 



E 



Indianapolis, Ind., 20, 65 



Farquhar, R. & J. & Co., seedsmen, Boston, Mass, 22, 34, 71 

Ferry -Morse Seed Co., Detroit, Mich., 17 

Ferry, D. M. & Co., seedsmen, Detroit, Mich., 26, 31, 52, 56, 58, 

65, 67, 68, 71, 87, 90 
Field beans, 74 

Field, Henry Seed Co., Schenandoah, Iowa, 26 
Fingerhuth, C. A., on common beans, 4 
Fish, Henry, bean breeder, Carpenteria, Cal., 86, 93 
Flemingia sp., 8 
Forcing types of beans, 7 

Ford, James, seedsman, Frankfort, Pa., 73, 87 
Frotscher, Richard, New Orleans, La., 22, 30, 91 
Fuchs Fuchsius , early mention of beans, 3 
Fusarium spp., 15 



Garden beans, dwarf varieties of, 35; pole varieties of, 20 

General notes, 17 

Gill Bros., seedsmen, Portland, Oregon, 23 

GUmore, J. W., 18 



Glossary, 19 
Gloyer, W. O, N. Y. 
Glycine hispida, 8 
Glycine max, 8 
Glycine soja, 8 



Expt. Sta., Geneva, N. Y., 81 



Goa bean, 8 

Golden gram, 12 

Grand Junction Seed Co., Grand Junction, Colorado, 30 

Gray and Trumbull, on history of beans, 3 

Gregory, J. J. H., seedsman, Marblehead, Mass., 23, 25, 29, 31, 32, 

33, 34, 35, 49, 53, 55, 58, 62, 74, 82 
Green gram, 12 

Grenell, W. H., bean breeder, Pierrepont Manor, N. Y., 6, 43, 62 
Groundnut, 8 

Grey, Thomas J., seedsman. Boston, Mass., 35 
Griswold, Thos., Wethersfield, Conn., 63 

H 

Harris, Joseph Co., seedsman, Coldwater, N. Y., 28 

Harvey Seed Co., Buffalo, N. Y., 63 

Hastings, H. G. & Co., seedsmen, Atlanta, Ga., 24, 25 

Hatt, Jack, bean breeder, Argentine, Mich, 78 

Heinemann, F. C, Erfurt, Germany, 20 

Henderson, Peter & Co., seedsmen. New York, N. Y., 32, 36, 39, 

40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 51, 53, 55, 61, 65, 70, 89, 93 
Hendry, G. W., 72 
History of garden beans, 8 
Hog peanut, 8 

Horticultural or shell beans, 70 

Horticultural beans, dwarf varieties of, 73; pole varieties of, 70 
Hovey & Co., Boston, Mass., 6 

Humboldt, Bonplant & Kunth, nomenclature of beans, 5 
Hungerford, Jefferson Co., New York, 69 
Hyacinth bean, 10 



Irish, H. C, 17, 18, 22, 24, 27, 28, 31, 32, 34, 38, 70, 44, 47, 48, 50, 
59, 77, 79, 83, 96, 97 



Jack bean, 9 

Jacquin, nomenclature of beans, 4 

Jarvis, C. D„ 17, 18, 33, 36, 39, 40, 44, 48, 66, 79, 84, 86, 87 

Jerrard, Geo. W. P., seedsman, Caribou, Maine, 75, 97 

Johns, H. A., Sioux City Seed Co., Sioux City, Iowa, 67 

Johnson, Mark W. Seed Co., Atlanta, Ga., 94 

Johnson, Thos., early mention of runner beans, 5 

Johnson & Musser, seedsmen, Los Angeles, Calif., 33 

Johnson & Stokes, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., 31, 34, 42, 55, 63, 

66, 87 
Jones, A. N., bean breeder, Le Roy, N. Y., 6, 42, 44, 61, 63 
Jordan, Dr., 25 
Jussieu, nomenclature of beans, 4 

K 

Keeney, C. N., bean breeder, 6 

Keeney, N. B. & Son, Le Roy, N. Y., 18, 35, 37, 42, 49, 54, 55, 56, 

63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70 
Kelway & Son, seedsmen, Langport, England, 44 
Kendal & Whitney, seedsmen, Portland, Maine, 39, 42 
Kennedy, Walter, Chief of Alleghany Reservation, Salamanca, 

N. Y., 78 
Kniphof, early mention of runner bean, 5 
Kramer, John, Doylestown, Pa., bean breeder, 6, 32 



Lablab, 9, 19 

Lablab benghalensis, 10 

Lablab cultratus, 10 

Lablab jerrugineus, 10 

Lablab leucocarpus, 10 

Lablab nankinicus, 10 

Lablab niger, 10 

Lablab perennans, 10 

Lablab purpureus, 10 

Lablab rufus, 10 

Lablab vulgaris, 10 

Lablab vulgaris alba. 10 

Lablab vulgaris poecila, 10 

Lablab vulgaris pumila, 10 

Lablab vulgaris rubra, 10 

Lablavia, 9, 10 

Lablavia vulgaris, 10 

Lamarck, on runner beans, 5 

Landreth, D. Seed Co., Bristol, Pa., 6, 17, 29, 60, 66, 94 

Lanton, 12 

Leonard, S. F., seedsman, Chicago, 111., 65 

Liebrechtsia, 10 

Lima beans, 85; dwarf varieties of, 91; diseases, 16; historical notes 

on, 4; pole varieties of, 86; selection and breeding, 16; variation 

in, 16; varieties of 



INDEX 



107 



Aroostook Bush Lima, 97 

Black Lima, 86 

B/iss Syn. of Extra Early Jersey, 

87 
Bliss Extra Early Pole Lima 

Syn. of Extra Early Jersey, 87 
Buckbee's King of the Gar- 
den Syn. of King of the 

Garden, 88 
Buist's Mammoth Podded 

Ideal Syn. of Henderson's 

Ideal, 88 
Burpee, 91 
Burpee's Bush Syn. of Burpee, 

91, 75 
Burpee's Giant Podded, 75 
Burpee Improved, 92 
Burpee's Large Bush Syn. of 

Burpee, 91 
Butter Syn. of Large White, 89; 

Syn. of Small White, 90 

Calico, see Florida Butter Pole, 

87 
Caroline Syn. of Small White, 

90 
Carolina Sewee Syn. of Small 

White, 90 
Carpenteria, 86, 75 
Carpenteria Large Green 

Seeded Syn. of Carpenteria, 

86 
Challenger, 86 
Challenger Syn. of Dreer's 

Bush, 92 
Chris Simon's Large Podded, 90 
Common Lima Syn. of Large 

White, 89 
Crenshaw Large White Syn. 

of Burpee, 91 

Dallas Syn. of Dreer's Bush, 92 

Detroit Mammoth, 87 

Don Bush Lima Syn. of Bur- 
pee, 91 

Dreer Syn. of Challenger, 86 

Dreer's Bush, 92 

Dreer's Improved Syn. of Chal- 
lenger, 6, 86 

Dreer's Large Bush Syn. of 
Wonder, 95 

Dreer's Pole Lima, 86, 75 

Dreer's Wonder Syn. of Won- 
der, 95 

Dwarf Carolina Syn. of Hen- 
derson, 93 

Dwarf Large White, see Dreer's 
Bush, 92 

Dwarf Lima, 23 

Dv.arf Potato Syn. of Dreer's 
Bush, 92 

Dwarf Sieva Syn. of Henderson, 
93, 92, 75 

Earliest Bush Syn. of Hender- 
son, 93 

Early Jersey Syn. of Extra 
Early Jersey, 87 

Early Leviathan Syn. of Levi- 
athan, 89, 75 

Early Small Sieva Pole, 90 

Elliott's Bush Syn. of Burpee, 
91 

Elliott's Improved Pole Lima 
Syn. of Challenger, 86 

Enormous Syn. of Burpee Im- 
proved, 92 

Enormous Early, 92 

Extra Early Syn. of Extra 
Early Jersey, 87 

Extra Early Jersey, 87 

Extra Early Small Bush, 75 

Florida Butter, 87, 75 

Forbes Potato Pole Syn. of 

Challenger, 86 
Ford Syn. of Ford's Mammoth, 

87 
Fordhook, 93, 75 



Ford's Extra Large Mammoth 
Syn. of Ford's Mammoth, 87 

Ford's Mammoth, 87 

Ford's Mammoth Podded 
Lima Syn. of Ford's Mam- 
moth, 87 

Frost Syn. of Small White, 90 

Garden King Syn. of King of 
the Garden, 88 

Giant, see Giant Podded, 88, 90 

Giant Bush Syn. of Burpee 
Improved, 92 

Giant Improved Syn. of Bur- 
pee Improved, 92 

Giant Podded, 88 

Green Prolific Syn. of Carpen- 
teria, 86 

Green Seeded Syn. of Carpen- 
teria, 86 

Haricot de Lima Syn. of Large 
White, 89 

Henderson, 6, 43 

Henderson Bush Lima, 93 

Henderson's Ideal, 88 

Henderson's Improved Bush 
Lima Syn. of Wood's Pro- 
lific, 96 

Henderson's Leviathan Syn. 
of Leviathan, 89 

Ideal Syn. of Henderson's Ideal, 

88 
Ideal Giant Syn. of Henderson's 

Ideal, 88 
Ideal Pole Lima, 75 
Improved Henderson Bush, 75 
Improved Large Bush Syn. of 

Burpee Improved, 92 

Jackson Syn. of Jackson Won- 
der, 94 

Jackson Wonder, 94, 75 

Jackson Wonder Dwarf Sieva 
Syn. of Jackson Wonder, 94 

Jersey Syn. of Extra Early Jer- 
sey, 87 

Kelsey Bush Syn. of Hender- 
son, 93 

King of the Garden, 88, 75 

King's Improved Syn. of 
Wood's Improved, 91 

King's Improved Bush Lima 
Syn. of Wood's Prolific, 96 

Kumerle Syn. of Dreer's Bush, 
92 

Landreth's Bush Lima Syn. 

of Henderson, 93 
Large, 6 
Large Flat Syn. of Large White, 

89 
Large Lima Syn. of Large 

White, 89 
Large White, 6, 89 
Large White Bush Syn. of 

Burpee, 91 
Leviathan, 89 
Lewis Lima, 85 

Mammoth Bush Syn. of Bur- 
pee, 91 

May's Champion Syn. of Large 
White, 89 

Monstrous, 94 

Mottled Sieva, see Florida But- 
ter, 87 

New Carpenteria Syn. of Car- 
penteria, 86 

New Improved Syn. of Burpee 
Improved, 92 

Nichol's Medium Butter Pole 
Lima Syn. of Wood's Im- 
proved, 91 

Nicholson's Speckled Syn. of 
Jackson Wonder, 94 

Noll's Ideal Potato Pole Lima 
Syn. of Challenger, 86 

Old Florida Bush Lima Syn. 
of Jackson Wonder, 94 



Old Florida Pole Lima Syn. of 
Florida Butter, 87 

Parker Pole, see Sunnybrook, 91 

Philadelphia, 94 

Piatt's Improved Syn. of King 
of the Garden, 88 

Piatt's King of the Garden 
Syn. of King of the Garden, 88 

Piatt King Lima Syn. of King 
of the Garden, 88 

Potato Bush Syn. of Dreer's 
Bush, 92 

Potato Pole Lima Syn. of Chal- 
lenger, 86, 90 

Prolific Bush Syn. of Hender- 
son, 93 

Prolific Bush Lima Syn. of 
Wood's Prolific, 96 

Red Lima, 89 

Saba Syn. of Small White, 90 

Salem, 89 

Salem Improved Syn. of Salem, 

89 
Salem Mammoth Syn. of 

Salem, 89 
Salzer's Bush Syn. of Dreer's 

Bush, 92 
Scarlet Lima, see Red Lima, 89 
Schwill's Monstrous Pole Syn. 

of King of the Garden, 88 
Seiberts, 90 
Seiberts Early Syn. of Seiberts, 

90 
Seiberts Extra Early Syn. of 

Seiberts, 90 
Shotwell's Improved Thick 

Syn. of Challenger, 86 
Shotwell's Pole Lima Syn. of 

Challenger, 86 
Sieva Syn. of Small White, 6, 90 
Sivy Syn. of Small White, 90 
Skillman' s Pole Lima Syn. of 

Seiberts, 90 
Sky Syn. of Small White, 90 
Small White, 6, 90, 75 
Small White Bush Syn. of 

Henderson, 93 



Southern Willow-leaved Se- 
wee Pole Lima Syn. of Wil- 
low Leaved, 91 

Speckled Beauty Syn. of Flor- 
ida Butter Pole, 87 

Speckled Pole Lima Syn. of 
Florida Butter Pole, 87 

Spotted Butter Syn. of Florida 
Butter Pole, 87 

Steckler's Calico Bush Syn. of 
Jackson Wonder, 94 

Stokes Evergreen Syn. of 
Salem, 89 

St. Louis Seed Co.'s Improved 
Bush Lima Syn. of Wood's 
Prolific, 96 

Sunnybrook, 90, 75 

Superba, 95, 75 

Thorburn's Bush Lima Syn. 

of Dreer's Bush, 92 
Trucker's Delight Syn. of Sei- 

bert's, 90 
True Bush Syn. of Burpee, 92 
Tucker's Prolific Bush Lima 

Syn. of Wood's Prolific, 96 

Walter's Prolific Pole Lima 

Syn. of Challenger, 86 
Walter's Prolific Potato Leaf 

Syn. of Challenger, 86 
Walter's Prolific Thick Syn. 

of Challenger, 86 
West Indian Syn. of Small 

White, 90 
White Syn. of Small White, 90 
Wilder, 90 
Wil key's Perfection Prize Syn. 

of Seiberts, 90 
Willets Bush Syn. of Burpee, 92 
Willow-leaved, 91, 75 
Willow-leaved Bush, 95 
Wilson Bush Syn. of Burpee 

Improved, 92 
Wonder, 95 
Wonderful, 96 
Wood's Bush Syn. of Wood's 

Prolific, 96 
Wood's Improved, 91 
Wood's Prolific, 96 



Linneaus, classification of beans, 3; of lima beans, 4; of runner 

beans, 5 
Lipusa, 5, 11 
Lipusa multiflora, 13 
Lipusa multiflora alba, 13 
Lipusa multiflora bicolor, 13 
Lipusa multiflora coccinea, 13 
Lipusa multiflora lucida, 13 

Livingston, A. W. & Sons, seedsmen, Columbus, Ohio, 28, 63 
Lobelius (de l'Obelj, early mention of beans, 3 
Louriero, nomenclature of lima beans, 4 
Low, Aaron Seed Co., Boston, Mass., 45, 71 
Lucas, Dr. E., Reutlingen, Germany, 27 
Luce, Byron, Marion, N. Y., 81 

M 

Macfadyen, on lima beans, 5 
Malocchia, 8 
Malocchia ensiformis, 9 
Malocchia gladiata, 9 

Martens, George von, classification of beans, 4, 5, 14, 18, 22, 23, 27, 
28,29,33,36,40,44,48,49,50, 53, 62, 66, 69, 70, 73, 84,97,98 

Martyn, Thos., early mention of beans, 3, 5 

Mash, 12 

Maule, Wm. Henry, seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 25, 26, 44, 65 

Mauritius bean, 4 

Mawe-Abercrombie, 39, 84 

Maxon, T. V., Jefferson Co., New York, 69 

McCullough, J. M. Sons & Co., Cincinnati, Ohio, 21 

Medicus, on lima beans, 4 

Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, Mo.. 18, 21, 22, 27, 28, 29, 
30,32 

Mitchell, Henry F., seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 88 

Moench, on lima beans, 4 

Morris & Snow, seedsmen, Los Angeles, Calif., 94 

Moth bean, 12 

Xlucuna sp., 8 

Mung bean, 12 



108 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



N 

Nicholson, on runner bean, 5 

Noll, J. F. 85 Co., seedsmen, Newark, N. J., 65 

Northrup, Braslan Goodwin Co., seedsmen, Minneapolis, Minn., 

Northrup, King & Co., seedsmen, Minneapolis, Minn., 26 



Olds, L. L. Seed Co., Clinton, Wis., 59, 63 

Oregon pea, 12 

Oriedo, beans in the New World, 3 



Pachyrhizus tuberosus, 8 
Palmer, Ashur, Kennet Square, Pa., 92 
Parkinson, early mention of beans, 3 
Pearce Seed Co., London, Canada, 61 
Perrier, Mons., Bathie, France, 24, 31, 40 
Phasellus, 11 
Phaseoleae, 8 
Phaseolus, 8, 10, 11 
Phaseolus achariensis, 4 
Phaseolus aconitifolius, 11, 12 
Phaseolus acuti/olius. 12, 13, 14 
Phaseolus acutifolius latifolius, 13 
Phaseolus acutifolius tenuifolius. 13 
Phaseolus adenanthus, 5 
Phaseolus amazonicus, 15 
Phaseolus amoenus, 14 
Phaseolus annularis, 12, 13 
Phaseolus angulosus, 14 
Phaseolus asparagoides, 14 
Phaseolus aureus, 12 
Phaseolus bicolor, 5, 13 
Phaseolus bipunctatus, 4, 5, 15 
Phaseolus calcaratus, 12 
Phaseolus calcaratus glabra, 12 
Phaseolus calcaratus gracilis, 12 
Phaseolus calcaratus major, 12 
Phaseolus calcaratus Rumbaiya, 12 
Phaseolus carinatus, 14 
Phaseolus coccineus, 3, 5, 12, 13, 96 
Phaseolus coccineus albiflorus, 13 
Phaseolus coccineus albonanus, 13 
Phaseolus coccineus albus, 13 
Phaseolus coccineus bicolor, 13 
Phaseolus coccineus rubronanus, 13 
Phaseolus compressus, 14 
Phaseolus cruentus, 14 
Phaseolus cylindricus, 11 
Phaseolus derasus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus dintidiatus, 14 
Phaseolus dumosus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus ellipticus, 14 
Phaseolus esculentus, 4, 14 
Phaseolus foecundus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus glaber, 12 
Phaseolus gonospermus, 14 
Phaseolus gonospermus castaneus, 23 
Phaseolus haematocarpus, 14 
Phaseolus ilocanus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus inamoenus, 3, 4, 5, 15 
Phaseolus ionocarpus, 14 
Phaseolus latisiliquus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus lilac, 14 
Phaseolus limensis, 5, 15, 16 
Phaseolus limensis limenanus, 16 
Phaseolus lunatus, 3, 4, 5, 12, 15, 16 
Phaseolus lunatus limenanus, 16 
Phaseolus lunatus lunonanus, 16 
Phaseolus lunatus macrocarpus, 5, 15, 16 
Phaseolus lunatus salicis, 16 
Phaseolus lunatus solanoides, 16 
Phaseolus lupinoides, 14 
Phaseolus macrocarpus Moench, 4, 15 
Phaseolus macrocarpus Poir, 4, 5, 15 
Phaseolus max, 8, 12 
Phaseolus maximus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus melanospermus, 14 
Phaseolus mexicanus, 14 
Phaseolus multiflorus, 5, 13 
Phaseolus multiflorus albiflorus, 5, 13 
Phaseolus multiflorus albus. 5. 13 
Pliaseolus multiflorus bicolor, 5, 13 
Phaseolus multiflorus coccineus. 5, 13 
Phaseolus multiflorus niger, 5, 13, 97 
Phaseolus mungo, 11, 12 



23 



Phaseolus nanus, 4, 14 
Phaseolus nigerrimus, 14 
Phaseolus nigricans, 14 
Phaseolus oblongus, 14 
Phaseolus oblongus albus, 84 
Phaseolus oblongus lutens, 75 
Phaseolus oblongus Sargentone, 66 
Phaseolus oblongus turcicus, 36 
Phaseolus ovalispermus, 14 
Phaseolus parviflorus, 4, 15 
Phaseolus pictus, 14 
Phaseolus platyspermus, 15 
Phaseolus praecox, 14 
Phaseolus puberulus, 5, 15 
Phaseolus radiatus, 12 
Phaseolus romanus, 4, 14 
Phaseolus rufus, 4, 15 
Phaseolus saccharatus Macf., 5, 15 
Phaseolus saccharatus Stokes, 4, 15 
Phaseolus saponaceus, 14 
Phaseolus sinensis, 14 
Phaseolus sordidus, 8 
Phaseolus sphaericus, 14, 62 
Phaseolus sphaericus dimidiatus, 62 
Phaseolus sphaericus niger, 33 
Phaseolus sphaerospermus, 10 
Phaseolus subglobosus, 14 
Phaseolus sublobatus, 12 
Phaseolus tenuifolius, 13 
Phaseolus torosus, 12 
Phaseolus triangularis, 14 
Phaseolus tumidus, 14 
Phaseolus vexillatus, 5, 14, 15 
Phaseolus vulgaris, 3, 4, 12, 14 
Phaseolus vulgaris altus, 4 
Phaseolus vulgaris coccineus, 5, 13 
Phaseolus vulgaris humilis, 14 
Phaseolus vulgaris medius 4 
Phaseolus vulgaris multiflorus, 5, 13 
Phaseolus vulgaris nanus, 4, 14 
Phaseolus vulgaris nonscandens, 14 
Phaseolus Xuarezii, 4, 5, 15 
Phaseolus zebra, 14 
Phytophthora phaseoli, 16 
Piegon pea, 9 

Plant illustrations: Black Valentine, 36; Butterfly Runner, 94; 
Dreer's Pole Lima, 86; Dwarf Sieva, 92: Earliest Market Wax, 
63; Early Stringless Wax, 32; Emerald Beauty, 44; Enormous 
Early, 92; Jubilee Runner, 97; New Wax, 67; Perpetual or Ever- 
bearing Wax, 57; Perry Marrow, 74: Profusion Wax, 66; Saddle 
Back Wax, 69; Scarlet Runner, 96; Sunrise, 53; Triumph of the 
Frames, 52 

Piatt, Frank S., seedsman, New Haven, Conn., 88 

Plectropis, 10 

Pod illustrations: Bijou, 95; Black Turtle Soup, 80; Black Vene- 
zuelan, 61; Boston Favorite, 80; Bountiful, 43; Burpee's Brittle 
Wax, 60: Burpee's Stringless Green Pod, 42; Challenge Black 
Wax, 62; Chris Simon's Large Podded, 90; Climbing French, 22; 
Cut Short, 23; Davis Wax, 61; Dutch Case Knife, 22; Early 
Small Sieva Pole, 90; Early Stringless Wax, 56; Emperor of 
Russia, 37; Extra Early Wax, 61; First Early, 43; Fordhook 
Favorite, 42; Full Measure, 37; Giant, 90; Giant Stringless 
Green Pod, 42; Green Gem, 43; Grenell's Improved Kidney 
Pod Golden Wax, 62; Golden Cluster Wax, 3i: Golden Lazy 
Wife, 33; Golden Pod, 33; Hodson Green Pod, 37; Hodson 
Silver Wax, 61; Improved Black Wax, 62: Improved Early Red 
Valentine, 81; Improved Robust, 80; Kentucky Wonder, 23; 
Kentucky Wonder Wax, 33; Longfellow, 37; Low's Champion, 
45; Magpie, 45; Mammoth Stringless White Pod Wax, 68; 
Missouri Wonder, 22; Oregon Giant, 23; Oregon Lima, 95; Pencil 
Pod Black Wax, 60; Perry Marrow, 80; Potato, 90; Rogers 
Stringless Green Pod, 42; Round Pod Kidney Wax, 56; Round- 
Pod Six Weeks, 43; Rustproof Intermediate Horticultural, 81; 
Ruby Dwarf Horticultural, 81; Scarlet Runner, 95; Scotia, 23; 
Southern Prolific, 22: Stringless King of the Wax, 56; Stringless 
Refugee Wax, 62; Stringless Yellow Pod Wax, 68; Sunrise, 45; 
Sure Crop Stringless Wax, 61; Unrivalled Wax, 68; Violet 
Flageolet Wax, 60; Wardwell's Kidney Wax, 60; Webber Wax, 
56; Well's Red Kidney, 80; White Dutch Runner, 95: White 
Lental, 80; White Wax Bush, 68; Wilder, 90; Wonder of France, 
45 

Poiret, form of lima bean, 4 

Pole beans, Green Pod, 20; Horticultural, 

31 
Powell. E. P., North Carolina, 27 
Prince Maximilian of Wied, 22 
Psophocarpus tetragonolobus, 8 
Pueraria sp., 8 



70; Lima, 86; Wax Pod, 



INDEX 



109 



Rahe Seed Co., Cincinnati, Ohio, 47 

Rawson, W. W., seedsman, Boston, Mass., 63 

Recording Data, method of, 17 

References, 17 

Reuter, Chris Seed Co., New Orleans, La., 24 

Rice bean, 12 

Rice. J. B. Seed Co., Cambridge, N. Y.. 17 

Rhynchosia sp., 8 

Rogers Bros. Seed Co., Chicago, 111., 17, 55, 65, 69 

Ross Bros., seedsmen, Wichita, Kansas, 71 

Roxburgh, named form of lima bean, 5 

Runner bean, historical notes on, 5; descriptions, 96; varieties of: 



Arabian Colored Runner, see 

Arabian Runner, 97 
Arabian Runner, 97 
Arabian White Flowered , see 

Arabian Runner, 97 
Arabische schwarze Syn. of 

Black Runner, 97 
Aroostook Multiflora Syn. of 

Aroostook Bush Lima, 97 
Aztec Syn. of Barteldes Bush 

Lima, 97, 75 

Barteldes Bush Lima, 97 

Bicolor Runner Syn. of Painted 
Lady, 98 

Bijou, 97, 95 

Black Runner, 97 

Black Seeded Runner Syn. of 
Black Runner, 97 

Black Stake Syn. of Black 
Runner, 97 

Bunt Bluhende Bohne Syn. 
of Painted Lady, 98 

Bush Multiflora Syn. of Bar- 
teldes Bush Lima, 97 

Butterfly, 97, 94, 75 

California Butter Syn. of Bar- 
teldes Bush Lima, 97 

California Cream Butter Syn. 
of Barteldes Bush Lima, 97 

Carter's Champion Syn. of 
Scarlet Runner, 98 

Champion Scarlet Syn. of 
Scarlet Runner, 98 

Chelsea Syn. of White Dutch 
Runner, 98 

Chids Extra Early Lima Syn. 
of White Dutch Runner, 98 

Conqueror Syn. of Scarlet Run- 
ner, 98 

Dutch Runner Syn. of White 
Dutch Runner, 98 

Fire Bean Syn. of Scarlet Run- 
ner, 98 

Grand Valley White Egg Syn. 
of Barteldes Bush Lima, 97 

Haricot d'Espagne a grain 
noir Syn. of Black Runner, 97 



Haricot d' Espagne bicolor 

Syn. of Painted Lady, 98 
Haricot d' Espagne blanc Syn. 

of White Dutch Runner, 98 
Haricot d' Espagne rouge Syn. 

of Scarlet Runner, 98 
Havai Supai Syn. of Barteldes 

Bush Lima, 97 

Improved Prolific Syn. of 
White Dutch Runner, 98 

Isbell's Perfect Syn. of White 
Dutch Runner, 98 

Jubilee Runner, 97 

Mammoth Syn. of White 
Dutch Runner, 98 

Mammoth Syn. of Scarlet Run- 
ner, 98 

Monarch Syn. of White Dutch 
Runner, 98 

Ne Plus Ultra Runner Syn. of 
Scarlet Runner, 98 

Oregon Pole Lima Syn. of 
White Dutch Runner, 98, 95 

Painted Lady, 6, 98 
Painted Runner Syn. of Paint- 
ed Lady, 98 
Pale Dun Runner, 27 
Papilio Syn. of Butterfly, 97 

Red Giant Syn. of Scarlet Run- 
ner, 98 

Scarlet Syn. of Scarlet Runner, 
98 

Scarlet Emperor Syn. of Scar- 
let Runner, 98 

Scarlet Runner, 6, 98, 75, 95, 96 

Stangenbohne Syn. of Black 
Runner, 97 

White Dutch Runner, 6, 98, 
75,95 

York and Lancaster Syn. of 
Painted Lady, 98 



Salisbury, name for common bean, 4 

Salzer. John A., Seed Co., La Crosse, Wis., 37 

Savi, Gaetano, classification of beans, 4, 14 

Schell, Walter S., Inc., seedsmen, Harrisburg, Pa., 25, 74 

Schmidt, J. C, seedsman, Erfurt, Germany, 27 

Schrank, form of lima bean, 4 

Scytalis, 10 

Seed illustrations: Abundance, 72; Admiral Togo, 72; Aztec or 
Mexican Lima, 75; Baldwin Wonder Wax, 73; Beautiful bean, 
76; Best Yet Wax, 76; Black Turtle Soup, 72; Black Valentine, 
72; Boston Favorite, 73; Boston Marrow, 77; Boston Navy, 
77; Boston White Baking, 77; Brittle Wax, 76; Broad Mazagan, 
75; Broad Windsor, 75: Burbank Navy, 77; Burgers Green 
Pod, 77; Burlingame Medium Field, 77; Burpee's Bush Lima, 
75; Burpee's Giant Podded Pole Lima, 75; Burpee's New Kid- 
ney Wax, 76: Burpee's Saddle Back Wax, 72: Burpee's String- 
less Green Pod, 72; Butterfly, 75; Canadian Wonder, 72; Car- 
mine old seed , 73; Carpenteria Pole Lima, 75; Celestial Bush 
Wax, 72; China Red Eye, 76; Climbing French Carter's Re- 
selected, 72; Crimson Beauty, 73; Crystal White Wax, 77; 



Currie's Rustproof Black Wax, 72; Cut Short or Corn Hill, 73; 
Davis Wax, 77; Detroit Wax, 76; Dreer's Pole, 75; Dutch Case 
Knife, 77; Dwarf Golden Wax, 76; Dwarf Sieva Lima, 75; 
Earliest of All Wax, 72; Early Harvest Wax, 72; Early Leviathan 
Pole Lima, 75; Early Mohawk, 73; Early Mohawk Six Weeks, 
73; Emperor of Russia, 73; Excelsior Refugee, 73; Extra Early 
Refugee Wax, 73; Extra Early Small Bush Lima, 75; Fairfield 
Wonder Wax, 76; Faribault Kidney Wax, 76; Farquhar's Rust- 
less Golden Wax, 76; Fava, 75; Feltham Prolific State, 76; 
Florida Butter Pole, 75; Fordhook Bush Lima, 75; Fordhook 
Favorite, 77; Full Measure, 73; Georgia Pole, 72; German Black 
Wax, 72; Giant Stringless Wax, 72; Giant Sword Pole, 77; 
Golden Age New Stringless Wax, 73; Golden Butter Wax, 76; 
Golden Carmine Horticultural, 73; Golden Cluster Wax, 77; 
Golden Eyed Wax, 76; Golden Harvest Cluster Wax, 72; 
Golden Rustproof Wax, 76; Golden Wax, 76; Golden Wax (old 
style i, 76; Gray Seeded Kentucky Wonder, 73; Green Gem, 76; 
Green Podded Forcing, 72; Green Seeded Dwarf French, 77; 
Grenell's Imp. Golden Wax, 76; Grenell's Rustproof Dwarf 
Wax, 76; Hardy Wax, 73; Hidatsa Red, 72; Hodson Wax, 73; 
Hopkins Red Valentine, 73; Horticultural Bush, 73; Ideal Pole 
Lima, 75; Imperial White, 77; Imperial Yellow Eye, 77; Im- 
proved Black Wax, 72; Improved Butter Wax Bush, 76; Im- 
proved Dwarf Golden Wax, 76; Improved Golden Wax, 76; 
Improved Golden Wax Bush, 76; Improved Henderson Bush 
Lima, 75; Improved Robust, 77; Improved Rustproof Golden 
Wax, 76; Improved Yellow Eye, 77; Italian Pole, 73; Jackson 
Wonder Bush Lima, 75; Jacob's Cattle, 76; Keeney's Rustless 
Golden Wax, 76; Keeney's Stringless Green Refugee, 73; Ken- 
tucky Wonder Wax, 72; King of the Garden Pole Lima, 75, 
Large White Marrow, 77; Lazy Wife Pole, 77; Longfellow 
Stringless Green Pod, 73; Low's Champion, 72; Magpie, 76; 
Marvelous, 77; McCaslan Pole, 77; Mexican Pinto, 73; Mexican 
Red, 72; Missouri Wonder Pole, 73; Mont D'Or, 73; Nancy 
Davis Cornfield, 73; Nova Scotia Marrow, 77; Oregon Giant, 
73; Pencil Pod Black Wax, 72; Perry Marrow, 77; Pink Eye, 
77; Pinto, 73; Plentiful, 72; Prolific Black Wax Bush, 72; 
Prolific or Improved Black Wax, 72; Refugee 1 1000-1), 73; 
Round Pod Kidney Wax, 76; Royal White Kidney, 77; Ruby 
Horticultural, 73; Scarlet Flageolet Wax, 72; Scarlet Runner, 
75; Scotia, 73; Small White Pole Lima, 75; Soldier, 76; Southern 
Cornfield, 77; Southern Prolific, 72; State of Maine Improved 
Yellow Eye, 77; Stringless Kidney Wax, 76; Stringless King of 
the Wax, 76; Sulphur, 77; Sunnybrook Pole Lima, 75; Superba 
Bush Lima, 75; Sure Crop Stringless Wax, 72; Tendergreen 
New Stringless, 73; Tender Pod, 72; Tennessee Wonder, 73; 
Tewksbury Dwarf Horticultural, 73; Valentine Wax Bush, 73; 
Violet Flageolet Wax, 72; Wardwell's Kidney Wax, 76; Warren, 
72; Well's Red Kidney, 72; White Creaseback, 77; White Dutch 
Runner, 75; White Kidney (pure linel, 77; White Lental, 77; 
White Seeded Green Pod, 77; White Seeded Refugee Wax, 76; 
White Wax Bush, 77; White Wax Dwarf, 76: Willow Leaf Pole 
Lima, 75; Wonder of France, 77; Worcester Pole, 73; Yard Long 
or Cuban Asparagus, 72; Yellow Eye, 77; Yosemite Mammoth 
Wax, 72 

Sigmoidotropis, 1 1 

I. N. Simon & Son, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., 96 
Soja, 8 

Soja hispida, 8 
Soja max, 8 
Soja soja, 8 

Soy bean, 8, 12; varieties of: Black Eyebrow, 8; Dunfield, 8; Ham- 
ilton, 8; Ito San, 8; Midwest, 8: Minsoy, 8; Wilson, 8 
Spragg, F. A., Mich. Agr. College, Lansing Mich., 82 
Steele, Abel, Ferguson, Ontario, 37 
Stokes, forms of lima bean, 4 
Strophostyles, 10 

Sutton & Sons, seedsmen, Reading, England, 7, 47, 48, 50, 51 
Sword bean, 9 
Systematic botany of beans, 8 



Tait, George & Sons, seedsmen, Norfolk, Va., 59 

Tepary bean, 3, 12; varieties of: White, 12; Speckled Yellow, 12; 

Brown Speckled, 12 
Thorburn, J. M. & Co., seedsmen, New York, N. Y., 6, 26, 40, 42, 

53, 67, 68 
Titius, forms of runner beans, 5 
Tracy, W. W., Jr., 17, 18, 22, 23, 25, 27, 28, 36, 39, 40, 48, 66, 73, 

79, 87, 97, 98 
Tracy, W. W., Sr., 67 
Tragus Bocki, early mention of beans, 3 



u 



Urdbean, 12 

Uromyces appendiculatus, 15 



110 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Van Antwerp's Seed Store, Mobile, Ala., 24 

Varietal names, selection of, 17 

Vaughan, J. S., seedsman, Chicago, 111., 20, 21, 27, 69 

Velloso, form of runner bean, 5 

Vick, James & Sons, seedsmen, Rochester, N. Y., 60 

Vigna, 8, 10 
Vig.no catjang, 11 
Vigna cylindrica, 11 

Vigna sesquipedalis, 10, 11 
Vigna sinensis, 10 
Vigna sinensis cylindrica, 10. 11 
Vigna sinensis sesquipedalis, 10, 11 

Vilmorin-Andrieux & Co., seedsmen, Paris, France, 7, 21, 27, 28 

30, 34, 35, 39, 40, 43, 45, 46, 50, 52, 53, 64, 65, 68, 83 
Voandzeia subterranea, 8 

W 

Watkins 86 Simpson, seedsmen, London, England, 40, 53, 97 
Wells, John Q., Shortsville, N. Y., 81 
Wenderothia, 8 



Whetzel, H. H., N. Y. State Col. of Agriculture, 

Ithaca, N. Y., 80 
White, Fulton S., Birmingham, Ala., 26 
Will, Oscar H., seedsman, Bismarck, N. D., 75, 77, 78, 80 
Willdenow, classification of runner beans, 5 
Wilson, Samuel, Seed Co., Mechanicsville, Pa., 75, 94, 
Wing, Henry H., 17, 18, 33, 36, 44, 77 
Wood, Stubbs & Co., seedsmen, Louisville, Ky., 51 
Woodruff-Boyce Seed Co., Seattle, Wash., 43 
Woodruff, S. D., & Sons, Orange, Conn., 17 
Wood, T. W., & Sons, seedsmen, Richmond, Va., 30, 91, 93, 96 
Worlidge, early mention of beans, 3 



Yam bean, 8 
Yayenari, 12 



Zuccarini, form of lima bean, 4 






VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



VOL. 1— PART III 



SWEET CORN 



STATE OF NEW YORK — EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 

THE 

VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



BY 

WILLIAM T. TAPLEY 
WALTER D. ENZIE 
GLEN P. VAN ESELTINE 



REPORT OF THE 
NEW YORK STATE AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION 
FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 30, 1934 




I 3# 



T LIBRARY 

NEW Yor- 
BOTANIC A! 
GARDEN 

ALBANY 

J. B. LYON COMPANY, PRINTERS 

1934 



PREFACE 

Under authority from the State, Laws of 1925, the New York State Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station is publishing a work entitled The Vegetables of 
New York. The publication is to be issued in three volumes of several parts 
each. Part I of Volume 1, The Peas of New York, was printed in 1928; Part II, 
The Beans of New York, was printed in 1931. The Sweet Corn of New York now 
appears as Part III of Volume I. 

The Vegetables of New York is intended to be a more or less complete 
record of the vegetables grown in New York. In this work the separate chapters 
give the historical and botanical status of Maize; full horticultural descriptions 
of sweet and other types of corn used as a vegetable; and as complete a history 
of the evolution of these varieties as will show their past and present standing. 

The chief value to seedsmen and to growers of sweet corn lies in the discussion 
of varieties. The considerations which have governed the selection of varieties 
for full description and separation into major or minor sorts are : The present value 
to commercial and home growers of vegetables, the potential merit of new varieties, 
and the previous importance of historical varieties to the trade. An effort has 
also been made to give the vegetable breeder as complete information as possible 
on the characters of seed, plant and fruit, to describe varieties which have in 
the past been leading sorts and which therefore are of value in showing the trend 
of evolution in sweet corn, and to indicate the relationship of varieties. 

Chapter II on the Systematic Botany of Maize and that part of Chapter I 
on the early history of corn were written by Professor Van Eseltine, Systematic 
Botanist for this Station. The remainder of the work was written by Professors 
Tapley and Enzie. The authors wish to acknowledge many helpful suggestions 
from Professor C. B. Sayre, Chief of the Division of Vegetable Crops at this Station. 

U. P. HEDRICK 
Director, New York Agricultural Experiment Station 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER TEXT PAGE 

Preface iii 

I. History of Corn 3 

II. Systematic Botany of Maize, and its Allies. 9 

Synonomy of Maize 12 

III. Descriptions cf Varieties 14 

General Notes 14 

Glossary 17 

The White-kerneled Varieties of Sweet 

Corn 17 

The Yellow-kerneled Varieties of Sweet 

Corn 70 

Other Forms of Maize used as Sweet 

Corn 89 

White-kerneled Varieties 89 

Yellow-kerneled Varieties 93 

Supplementary List of Obscure 

Varieties 95 

Bibliography 96 

Index 101 



ILLUSTRATIONS F page G 

Bearsfoot 20 

Best of All 21 

Black Mexican 24 

Types of Maize Seeds 25 

Crosby 30 

Early Market 31 

Long Island Beauty 42 

Mammoth 43 

Mammoth White Cory 48 

Midget 49 

Narrow Grained Evergreen 52 

Ne Plus Ultra 53 

Oregon Evergreen 62 

Silver Bantam 63 

Vanguard 66 

Whipple's Early White 67 

Buttercup 72 

Charlevoix 73 

Gold Coin 76 

Golden Bantam 77 

Golden Cream 80 

Whipple's Early Yellow 81 

Adams Early 90 

White Australian 91 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK. I 



LEGUMES, CUCURBITS, CORN, ALLIUMS 



PART III: SWEET CORN 



NEW YORK 
BOTANIC >■ 

GA' 



CHAPTER I 
HISTORY OF CORN 



In the early days of the earth, when the Spirit of 
Good brought the birds and animals from the sun land, 
one of the birds, the crow, carried in his ear a grain of 
maize. The Spirit of Good planted this on his Mother's 
(the earth's) breast, and it became the first grain, the 
" life " of the red man. So runs the Iroquois legend 
of the origin of corn. 1 

There are many other legends among the various 
tribes of American Indians, and it is significant of the 
great age of maize culture that all tribes so far as known, 
in both North and South America, have no theories or 
historical explanations of their use of corn — only these 
myths and legends. Moreover, it is claimed by one 
investigator that " from purely botanical reasoning, 
based on a detailed comparison of maize with its wild 
relatives, Indian corn may confidently be proclaimed 
the most ancient of the cultivated cereals, if not of all 
cultivated plants." 2 

The beginnings of the story of corn are lost in per- 
haps the densest of the fogs of uncertainty and of time 
surrounding the origin of any of our cultivated plants. 
A number of hypotheses 1 have been suggested as to the 
origin of corn as a domesticated plant, but each meets 
objections of fact that prevent unqualified acceptance 
by close students of the question. 

One theory is that corn at one time existed as a 
wild form in practically its present state. But no form 
that we know at present seems able to exist in compe- 
tition with wild vegetation. All forms known are 
dependent on man for continued existence. 

Another theory is that corn may have arisen as a 
sport or mutation of some wild species, but geneticists 
find unanswerable objections in the characters of hybrids 
with the nearest forms. 

A third theory is that it may have arisen from teo- 
sinte, its closest botanical ally, or from crossing a closely 
allied plant with teosinte; but the character of the fruit 
of teosinte offers objections to this hypothesis, as do 
the characters of all known mutations of corn. 

A fourth theory is that corn is the culmination of 
a line of plants that originated at or before the time 
that teosinte became differentiated. One objection here 
seems to be the time element involved in consideration 
of the dependability of the plant upon man, and another 
is the close affinity to teosinte as shown by its inter- 
fertility with that species. 

It should be noted here that apparently every acre 



of land throughout Mexico, Central America, and 
Northern South America that furnishes the proper 
habitat for a wild maize, or a wild species allied to maize, 
has been or now is cultivated land. In fact, practically 
all teosinte is found either at the edge of corn fields or 
in deserted cornfields. It is possible that the wild 
ancestor of maize, if such a plant existed, has been 
exterminated by Indian civilization as thoroughly as 
the passenger pigeon and the great auk have been 
eradicated by white civilization in the comparatively 
recent past. The opinion of De Candolle that the 
natural area of corn was very small should be con- 
sidered in this connection. 

" If ever a plant could be said to be designed for 
the use of man, that plant is Indian corn. And in 
accordance with this seemingly providential plan, maize 
and man are inseparably associated in America as far 
back as human remains are found. Nowhere does 
maize grow without man's aid nor can it. . That 

the artificial development of maize had attained a high 
level in very early times is attested not only by the size 
of the prehistoric ears but also by their coloration. It 
is surely no accident that maize is the most decorative 
of crop plants, and clearly the element of art had entered 
into its breeding more than 2,000 years ago." 4 

The first tangible point in the history of corn is a 
fossil ear which was purchased from a collector of 
curios in Peru in 1914. This ear is said by the describer 5 
to be at least several thousand years old and is similar 
in individual characters to various Peruvian and Bolivian 
varieties. 

The second earliest record seems to be the ears 
found on the island of San Lorenzo, near Pallao, Peru, 
by Darwin, 6 who says, " I was much interested by 
finding on the terrace at the height of eighty-five feet, 
embedded amidst the shells and much sea-drifted 
rubbish, some bits of cotton thread, plaited rush, and 
the head of a stalk of Indian corn; I compared these 
relics with similar ones taken out of Huacas, or old 
Peruvian tombs and found them identical in appear- 
ance." In another place 7 he states that various facts 
" render it almost certain that they were accumulated 
on a true beach, since upraised eighty-five feet, and 
upraised this much since Indian man inhabited 
Peru." This would seem to indicate that both corn 
and man had occupied this region for a number of 
centuries. 



1 Iroquois myths and legends. N. Y. State Museum Bui. 437; 63. 1908. 
- Kempton. J. H. Maize, the plant-breeding Achievement of the American Indian 
■ The reader interested in a thorough discussion of these theories is referred to Collins, G. N 
Bot. Club, 57 -.199-210. 1930. 

4 Kempton, J. H. Loc. cit.. 326-327. 

'- Knowlton, F. H. Jour. Wash. Acad. Sci.. 9:134. 1919. 

8 Darwin, C. R. Journal Researches, 370. Appleton. 1896. 

7 Darwin, C. R. Geological Observations, 269. Appleton. 1897. 

3 



Smithsonian Sci. Ser., 11: 324. 1931. 

The phylogeny of maize. Bui. Torrey 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



These two early records may have some bearing on 
the question of the place of origin of corn which had been 
thought for a long time to be Mexico because of the 
occurrence there of corn's nearest ally, teosinte. Within 
the past year, however, teosinte has been found wild 
as far south as Guatemala. Moreover, the recent 
theory of Professor Vavilov that the center of distribu- 
tion of any cultivated species is the region showing the 
greatest number of distinct types points to northwestern 
South America. As regards maize, this theory was fore- 
shadowed by Sturtevant's statement in 1894 1 that, " the 
superior development of varieties ... is strong 
evidence in favor of a South American origin." It is, 
at least, certain that corn must have originated in the 
higher regions of tropical or subtropical America, regard- 
less of which theory of origin is finally accepted. 

Ears and cobs have been found in the pre-Columbian 
storage places of Pueblos, Cliff-dwellers, Aztecs, and 
Peruvians; and charred cobs and kernels have been dis- 
covered in ancient pits throughout eastern North 
America. 

In the southwestern United States ethnologists 
recognize six culture periods, viz.. Basket Maker I, II, 
and III, and Pueblo I, II, and III. They have estab- 
lished the date 1275 A. D. for the ending of the last 
period and buildings dated at 784 A. D. in Pueblo II 
and 660 A. D. in Pueblo I have been noted; 2 but beyond 
the probability that each period covered several centuries, 
no evidence has yet arisen that has enabled them to 
date the earlier periods with any degree of certainty. 
However, a single type of flint corn has been found in 
the period designated as Basket Maker II, and more 
numerous forms in each succeeding period. 

" In Central America the beginnings of the Maya 
culture go back at least seven centuries before Christ. 
No actual plant remains survive in this wet country, 
but we have representations in art of a corn god whose 
head dress is a conventionalized ear of corn 
These sculptures belong to the 4th and 5th centuries 
A. D." 3 

Columbus was apparently the first European to 
record corn when he wrote that he saw " a kind of 
grain called maiz " on the island of Cuba in 1492. How- 
ever, it is possible that Columbus was not the first to 
see maize growing. The legends concerning the dis- 
covery of corn, as well as grapes, by the Norsemen in 
Wineland the Good, early in the eleventh century have 
been pretty thoroughly discredited. Fernald 4 main- 
tained on botanical evidence that if the legends were 
to be accepted, then the plants noted in the Icelandic 
sagas as " hveiti," and assumed by many writers to 



be maize, were lyme-grass, Elytnus arenarius, and 
that the " vinber " were not grapes, but more probably 
" wineberries," Vaccinium Vitis-idaea. Andrews, in a 
review' of Fernald's paper, states that " Nansen with 
the able assistance of his colleagues, Torp, Moe, and 
others finds that the grapes and the self sown wheat 
(hveiti) . . are an offshoot of common medieval 

legends of the ' Islands of the Blest ' . . " There 

are also legends'' of Norsemen, captured by the natives, 
who were said to have traveled over a considerable 
portion of eastern North America before finally escaping 
to rejoin their countrymen in Greenland or Iceland. 
If there is a real basis of truth in these tales, it is not 
impossible that these hardy souls were the first Europeans 
to have actual experience with maize. 

Eleven years after the discovery of maize in Cuba, 
Diego Bartholomew " saw above six leagues of ground 
full of maize and cultivated " on the American mainland. 
" In 1520 the Spaniards in the battle with the Tepeacans 
were embarrassed by the tall maize that covered part 
of the plain." 7 In this same year " Magellan found 
maize at Rio de Janiero," and the Spaniards found corn 
of numerous types in Peru. Narvaez discovered maize 
to be a bounteous crop in Florida and westward in 1528 
and " during De Soto's invasion, 1540, maes was found 
everywhere along his route from Florida and Alabama 
to the upper part of the Mississippi, probably on the 
western bank of the Yazoo, in fields or stored in gran- 
aries." " When Cartier visited Hochelaga, now Mont- 
real in 1535, that town was situated in the midst of 
extensive corn fields, ' the grain even as the millet of 
Brazil, as great and somewhat bigger than small 
peason.' " 

Excerpts from the records of all the early adventurers 
in America tell us this same story of maize in compara- 
tive abundance from the Great Lakes of North America 
to the highlands of Peru and from Brazil back to what 
is now the state of Washington — not only was corn 
grown abundantly, but there were numerous varieties, 
yellow, red, blue, black, white, pink, and pied; small 
kerneled and large; hard corns and soft corns; few- 
rowed and many-rowed. In fact, in so far as varieties 
of maize are concerned, one might well say " there is 
nothing new under the sun " for the Indians seem to 
have had practically every type that we now know and 
seem to have paid a great deal of attention to some 
types, particularly color forms, that are unfamiliar to 
most people today. 

" In Europe, maize is said by Benzoni, who wrote 
in 1572, to have been brought by Columbus on his 
return from America to Spain, along with parrots and 



'Sturtevant, E. L. Notes on maize. Bui. Torrey Bot. Club., 21:34/. 1894. 

-Cotton, H. S. Science, ~7: 240. 1933. 

3 This quotation is from a letter of Dr. Herbert J. Spinden, Curator of Ethnology, Brooklyn Museum. The preceding paragraph is 
likewise largely an adaptation from the same letter. It is a pleasure to acknowledge our indebtedness to Dr. Spinden for the information 
given therein. 

* Fernald, M. L. Notes on the plants of Wineland the Good. Rhodora, 12:17. 1910. 

i Andrews, Leroy. Rhodora, 15:28. 1913. 

6 See in this connection, Fiske, John, Discovery of America, 1 : 244 {{. 1893. 

' Sturtevant's Notes on Edible Plants, 610. 1919. The preceding quotation as well as those following which are without reference 
are from the same source. 



HISTORY OF CORN 



other new Indian articles." It is said to have been 
cultivated in Andalusia and about Madrid before 1525. 
" In Germany, corn is mentioned by Bock, or Tragus 
as he is often called, who is one of the earliest writers 
on German plants and published in 1539." Apparently 
maize was known in France before 1536, but seems not 
to have been cultivated in Italy before the latter part 
of the sixteenth century. The Portuguese apparently 
carried maize on many of their numerous adventurings 
during the period 1500 to 1600 A. D., and introduced 
its culture fairly early in that century into Africa and 
parts of Asia. " Corn reached China in 1516," accord- 
ing to Malte-Brun. However, according to Weather- 
wax, 1 " several accounts in Chinese literature of the 
sixteenth century have been cited as evidence that 
maize was known in China in pre-Columbian times, 
[but] there has been cited no authentic 
mention of maize in Chinese literature definitely known 
to antedate the appearance of the Portuguese in the 
Orient in 1516." In this connection a peculiar form of 
maize described by Collins- from China and dissimilar 
to any known American type should be noted. 

" Today maize is extensively grown in Mexico, 
Argentina, Hungary, Roumania, Italy, Russia, Egypt, 
India, and South Africa; and, to a less extent, in Canada, 
Peru, Chile, Central America, Spain, Portugal, France, 
Germany, China, Japan, Australia, and the Philippines. 
But it is still principally an American crop, the United 
States producing each year three times as much as all 
other countries together." 3 

In reference to the great amount of corn produced 
in this country, it is of interest to note the increasing 
number of uses for the crop which American ingenuity has 
discovered. Aside from the use of the grain as a source 
of human food and of both the grain and vegetative 
parts as feed for animals, there are a hundred or more 
by-products now being used in American industries. 
A few of the more important are: Corn oil in soaps, lini- 
ments, dyes, paints, and oil cloth; corn dextrins for 
library pastes, size, and glazes; corn " gum " (a rubber 
substitute) in bath sponges, pencil erasers, can " rubbers," 
and hot water bottles; corn cellulose in press boards and 
insulating material ; and finally, various chemical residues 
in maizolith for fountain pens, pipe bits, and similar 
objects. 4 

No history of maize, however compressed, can omit 
reference to the sumptuous volume of Mathieu Bonafous, 
an elephant folio of 181 pages with 19 colored plates 
published in Paris in 1836. This Histoire Naturelle, 
Agricole, et Economique du Mais was apparently 
the first monograph on Indian corn. Bonafous' theories 
on the origin of maize and his system of classification 
have been largely superseded with the acquisition of 



more knowledge and only his names for three endosperm 
types remain current today. These include Zea Mays 
rugosa as the designation for sweet corn. 

Friedrich Alefeld proposed a very artificial classi- 
fication in his Landwirtschaftliche Flora in 1866 
which was considerably modified by Friedrich Korniche 
in his Systematische Ubersicht der Cerealen in 1873. 
Here the latter author grouped the sweet corn varieties 
together under the name Zea Mays saccharata, but, 
unfortunately, made color of kernel the chief distinguish- 
ing feature of his classification. Today, this system 
seems of little use in view of the preponderance of yellow 
and white types and the comparative unpopularity of 
all other colors in the chief sweet corn producing areas. 

A number of quotations have already been made 
from the work of E. L. Sturtevant, first director of this 
Station. His work has profoundly influenced the study 
of maize in this country, and all students of corn are 
indebted to his keen insight and his laborious research. 

The works of Weatherwax, Collins, and Kempton, 
cited in preceding footnotes, should be consulted by the 
reader who wishes to delve more exhaustively into the 
results of recent studies of maize. 

Sweet corn, the particular type of maize of interest 
for this account, seems not to have attracted especial 
interest among the Indians. No evidence thus far 
produced shows any particular ceremony connected 
with it similar to the religious rites attached to certain 
color types among some of the tribes. Yet it was 
undoubtedly distributed widely, as Hendry '" describes 
an ear of sweet corn from near Huamachucho, Peru, 
collected by M. Uhle and dating from 1000 to 1534 A. D. 
The final paragraphs of his paper are of particular 
interest here. He says, " It seems reasonable to con- 
clude as follows: First, that sweet maize has been 
derived through mutation from an older endosperm 
type or types, and that such mutation has occurred in 
at least one instance in the Peruvian Highlands prior 
to 1534 A. D. 

" Second, since only varieties of the floury and flint 
types are known to have existed there . . . and 
since the specimen resembles the former in minor vari- 
etal characteristics, ... it seems probable that in 
this instance the sweet mutant first appeared in a vari- 
ety of the floury type. 

" Third, a distinct group of sweet varieties . 
is to be found under cultivation among the Indians of 
the arid Southwest, and probably in Peru." 

Of its appearance in the records of white men, 
perhaps the best statement is that of Sturtevant,' 3 
which follows: 

" The history of the appearance of sweet corn in 
gardens shows it to be quite modern. In the New 



1 Weatherwax, Paul. The Story of the Maize Plant, 18. 1923. 

: Collins, G. N. A new type of Indian corn from China. V. S. Dept. Air. Bur. Plant Ind. Bui. 161. 1909. 

Weatherwax, Paul. Loc. cit., 17. 
1 For further information on by-products of corn the reader is referred to Slosson, E. E. Creative Chemistry, Chap. 10. 1920: 
and also to Weatherwax, Paul. Loc. cit.. Chap. 25. 

'Hendry, G. W. Archeological evidence concerning the origin of sweet maize. Jour. Amer. Soc. Agron., 22:508-514. 1930. 
' Sturtevanfs Notes on Edible Plants, 619. 1919. 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



England Farmer, Aug. 3, 1822, it is said ' a writer in 
the Plymouth paper asserts that sweet corn was not 
known in New England until a gentleman of that place, 
who was in Gen. Sullivan's expedition against the 
Indians in 1779, brought a few ears to Plymouth, which 
he found among the Indians on the border of the Sus- 
quehannah.' A writer the following September adds 
that this sweet corn was brought by Lieut. Richard 
Bagnal from Gen. Sullivan's expedition against the Six 
Nations in 1779 and was called papoon corn. ' That 
was the first of the species ever seen here, and has since 
that time been more and more diffused; and, I believe 
within a few years only, has undergone some change 
since it was first introduced — then the core was a 
bright crimson, and after being boiled and the corn taken 
off, if the corn was laid in contact with any linen, it 
communicated an indelible stain.' This inconvenience 
has disappeared. This species, also, like what is dis- 
tinguished by the appellation of southern, or flat corn, 
by repeated plantings here, assimilates it to our local 
corn — " 

" Sweet corn is not referred to by Jefferson in his 
' Notes on Virginia,' 1781; nor by McMahon, 1806; nor 
by Gardiner and Hepburn, 1818; nor by Thorburn, 1817; 
nor by Randolph, 1818; nor by Fessenden, 1828. The 
seed catalog of Thorburn, 1828, offers one variety, the 
Sugar, or Sweet. In 1801 Bordley mentions the ' sweet 
corn, having a white, shrivelled grain when ripe ' as 
yielding richer juice in the stalks than common corn. 
In 1832 ' sweet or sugar ' corn was mentioned among 
garden vegetables by Bridgeman." 

A study of the literature covering the food crops of 
the American Indian indicates the limited number of 
forms which could have reached the hands of our early 
farmers. If the white-kerneled, red-cobbed form carried 
from the fields of the Susquehannah to Plymouth in 
1779 was the first sweet corn known to the settlers, then 
all named varieties have originated within the last 150 
years. 

The writings of the early explorers do not give 
specific mention to sweet corns. In their study Corn 
Among the Indians of the Upper Missouri, Will and 
Hyde listed 104 named varieties of corn. These repre- 
sented the cultivated sorts known to 14 or more tribes 
of that region. Four of these were sweet corn and 
included a 10-rowed variety grown by the Mandans, 
the seed of which was colored red-brown when hard and 
dry; a 10- to 16-rowed yellow sugar corn cultivated by 
the Pawnees; and a 14-rowed cream colored or very 
light yellow sweet corn grown by the Ponkas. The 
only white sort mentioned was the Iroquois Sweet Puck- 
ered which was included in a number of varieties coming 
from the Onondaga Reservation in New York State. 

Scattered Corn, an elderly Mandan matron, whose 
father was the last Mandan corn priest and who herself 
is an excellent gardener, says that the varieties raised 
by her family were soft white, soft yellow, and wrinkled 
corn. The wrinkled type was a sweet corn of a brown- 
ish red color when ripe and hard and of a very good 



flavor when green. This may have been the original 
of the variety Nuetta now grown in the northern plains 
section. 

Two varieties of sweet corn are given by Parker 
in the list of forms grown by the Iroquois, Sweet or 
puckered and Black Sweet or black puckers. The 
first named might well have been the variety carried to 
Massachusetts by Lieut. Bagnal while the latter probably 
was an early form of our present day Black Mexican. 
What part these varieties played and when and how 
they found their way into the hands of the early settlers 
of New York may never be known. The last 50 years 
of the past century brought forth the gradual develop- 
ment of varietal nomenclature, as the total number of 
named varieties known during the fore part of the century 
possibly did not exceed 10. 

In 1848 Salisbury, 1 who was awarded a premium of 
$300 by the New York State Agricultural Society for an 
essay on maize or Indian corn, says, " There are several 
sub- varieties as the Small Early Sweet, the Rhode 
Island Sweet, the Hematite Sweet, and a new variety 
made by crossing the Sweet with the Early Canada." 

The Hematite Sweet, having white kernels and a 
red cob, is described as smaller than Rhode Island Sweet 
but larger than Early Sweet. The ears were 8-rowed 
and well filled. The other two varieties had white 
kernels and white cobs, the ears of Small Early Sweet 
being 8- to 10-rowed and from 3 to 6 inches long and 
those of Rhode Island Sweet 8-rowed and 5 to 8 inches 
long. The fourth variety mentioned, the yellow cross, 
is one of the first recorded " hybrid " sweet corns. Both 
of the parents were 8-rowed, the flinty Canada Yellow 
giving the yellow color and the Early Sweet the sweet 
character. The date when this cross was made is not 
given, but since its existence was recorded in 1848 it 
must have originated sometime before that date. Until 
1902, when Golden Bantam was introduced, yellow sweet 
corn was largely considered as unfit for use. Early 
Adams, a variety destitute of the corneous portion of 
the seed, was also mentioned. The kernels were 
described as having a shrivelled and dull appearance. 
This differs from the kernel characteristics of the Adams 
Early grown today. 

From the Magazine of Horticulture of December 
1850, the rise of another new variety can be followed. 
The account is rendered by the Rev. A. R. Pope of 
Somerville, Massachusetts, who carefully related the 
steps, beginning in 1845 and ending in 1850, incident 
I to the introduction of the new variety which he named 
Old Colony, a name for that part of New England near 
Kingston, Massachusetts. " As soon as the pistils 
or silk [of Southern White] seemed in a mature state 
the opening stamens of sweet corn stalks were carefully 
brought, and the pollen from them gently shaken upon 
the pistils. ... At the time of harvesting, more 
than one-half of the kernels bore all the ordinary out- 
ward appearances of sweet corn and had the sweetness 
peculiar to that variety, but taking the shape and size 
I natural to the cob on which they were grown." Speci- 



Salisbury, J. H. Maize, or Indian corn. Trans. N. Y. State Agr. Soc., 678-845. 1848. 



HISTORY OF CORN 



men ears, which received favorable notice by the Horti- 
cultural Society's committee at the annual exhibition, 
had from 14 to 18 rows. The ears were formed on the 
stalks at 4 to 5 feet from the ground, " a circumstance 
of some importance to those who, for neighborly regard, 
unhappily keep fowls which they happily do not own." 

The same magazine in 1851 copied a note written 
by Professor Mapes for " The Working Farmer," which 
related the superior qualities of Stowell's Sweet Corn. 
" This corn also is a hybrid between the Menomony soft 
corn and the Northern Sugar corn, and was first grown 
by Mr. Nathan Stowell of Burlington, New Jersey." 
The unusual quality of keeping long in the fresh green 
state is particularly noted. Seven years later the variety 
appeared in a list as Stowell's Evergreen. Since then 
this many-rowed sort has maintained its good qualities 
and today is an important variety for both canner and 
trucker. 

In 1851. Buist mentioned two varieties. In 1853, 
Bement says of the Early Sweet Corn, the variety 
introduced by Capt. Bagnoll of Plymouth, that, " one 
kind has a white cob, the other a red cob, the ears are 
short and usually contain 8 rows." From Sturtevant, 
" In 1854, Schenck mentioned the Extra Early, the 
Eight -rowed Sweet, and Stowell's Sugar, which had 
been brought into notice within a few months. In 1858, 
Kippart listed New England Sweet or Sugar, Mammoth 
Sugar, Stowell's Evergreen, and says further that 
Yellow, Blue, and Red Sugars are all mere sports from 
the New England and are not desirable." 

The varieties in common use during the early sixties 
were recorded by Burr in 1863. He mentioned Golden 
Sweet or Golden Sugar with dry kernels yellow, and 
Black Sweet or Slate Sweet with dry kernels black. 
Red Cob Sweet, having a red cob but white kernel, was 
described as having both an 8-rowed and a 12- to 
14-rowed form. Of the white varieties, the Early Sugar 
or small 8-rowed type had given way to Darling's 
Early, which however was of independent origin. A 
12-rowed Sweet appeared for the first time; and Burr's 
Improved, which was described as " an improved variety 
of the Twelve-Rowed Sweet," was also listed. This is 
the first mention of a variety which evidently was a 
straight selection from an established sort. Burr listed 
further Stowell's Evergreen, Old Colony, and Adams 
Early White, a dent form which has continued in use 
and which, although not a true sweet, has proved 
acceptable in quality to those to whom the peculiar, 
sugary character of the latter may be objectionable. 

To recapitulate, the 8- to 10-rowed types with the 
kernels white, black, white with red cob, and brownish 
red with red cob, together with the 10- to 16-rowed sort 
with the kernels yellow and cream or very light yellow, 
have come from the Indians. Twelve-Rowed Sweet, 
Mammoth Sugar, Darling's Early, Early Adams, Old 
Colony, Stowell's Evergreen, and Golden Sweet were 
named varieties added by agriculturists in the period 
up to the Civil War. From this time on the acquisi- 
tion of new varieties became greatly accelerated and 
the rise and fall of individual lines more difficult to follow. 



Sturtevant, in 1884, listed 24 additional varieties 
as follows: Amber Cream, Asylum, Black Sugar, Clark's 
Old Colony, Crosby's Early, Dolly Dutton, Egyptian, 
Genesee, Hickox, Landreth, Marblehead, Marblehead 
Mammoth, Minnesota, Moore's Early, Narragansett, 
Ne Plus Ultra, Orange, Potter's Excelsior, Pratt's Early, 
Red River, Squantum, Tom Thumb, Triumph, and 
Wyoming. These were described with brief historical 
notes. From other lists of this period 20 names of 
lesser known sorts have been found. In these lists 
several new types appeared. Notable among these was 
the introduction of the red-cobbed, red-kerneled type 
represented by Narragansett, Red River, and Marble- 
head. This red type was crossed with Moore's Early 
to produce Orange. Crosby appeared from an unknown 
source and represented a markedly different type of 
ear. A selection made from the cross of Crosby and 
Burr's Improved resulted in Moore's Early which was 
very popular for many years. Other types appearing 
in this period are represented by Triumph, a long slender 
8- to 10-rowed ear; Hickox, a large-eared variety that 
served the canning trade until very recently; and Ne 
Plus Ultra, the forerunner of Country Gentleman, 
unique because of the irregular distribution of kernels. 

The next two decades saw the introduction of many 
more varieties, including Cory, which was possibly a 
selection from Marblehead; Henderson, similar to 
Hickox; Pee and Kay; and Stabler's Early and Shakers' 
Early. The name Country Gentleman was given to 
a further improved strain of the original Ne Plus Ultra 
or Shoe Peg. This variety, late and of high quality, 
would seem to be permanently established as an all- 
time favorite. Aristocrat, Champion, Howling Mob, 
Kendel's Giant. Peep O'Day, and several varieties of 
the Evergreen group were important in certain localities. 
Gold Coin from Livingston represented a new yellow 
type with 16 to 24 rows. Golden Bantam, probably a 
selection from the Golden Nugget of Gregory, was 
destined to become the most popular variety. All 
the superior factors of name, earliness, color, flavor 
were involved in increasing its popularity. 

Ten years after the introduction of Golden Bantam 
the prejudice against yellow or horse corn, as this type 
was called, began to lessen and from then on the rise 
of the yellow and the decline of the white varieties is 
easily traced. Since 1910 there have been few white 
varieties that have been accepted and widely grown. 
This has been due not to any defects of the white varieties 
but rather to the partiality with which the public has 
viewed yellow sorts. In proportion to consumer demand 
the growers have gradually increased their plantings 
of the yellow varieties and decreased those of the whites. 

White varieties which have had a period of con- 
siderable popularity are Country Gentleman, Howling 
Mob, Long Island Beauty, Mayflower, Mimms' Hybrid, 
Premier, Pocohontas, Stowell's Evergreen, and Whipple's 
Early White. During the last 15 years a number of 
varieties have been introduced that have met with a 
considerable sectional popularity but are too new to 
have stood the test of time. Among these are Alpha, 



8 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Cupid, Early Malcolm, Early Market, Silver Bantam, 
Surprise, and White Sunrise. 

Pickaninny, a dwarf 8-rowed black, which originated 
at the Central Experimental Farm, Ottawa, Canada, 
should be mentioned because it is the first departure 
from the old and well-known Black Mexican. Will 
has stated that black sweet corn is very readily produced 
when either natural or intentional crosses occur between 
black and very dark blue flint or flour corn varieties 
and any of the sweet corn varieties. 

The total number of yellow varieties which have been 
introduced is much smaller than the list of whites. Out- 
standing in the list are Banting, Bantam Evergreen, 
Barden's Wonder Bantam, Buttercup, Charlevoix, Gold 
Coin, Golden Bantam, Golden Early Market, Golden 
Gem, Golden Giant, Golden Nugget, Golden Rod, 
Golden Sweet, Spanish Gold, Sunshine, Seymour's 
Sweet Orange, and Whipple's Yellow. With the excep- 
tion of Golden Sweet and the original Golden Nugget, 
all of these are grown today and are by far the most 
popular group of sweet corn varieties. 

Variety names have served to designate types and 
forms throughout the period that sweet corn has been 
grown. Within recent years plant breeders have 
brought into existence new methods of producing sweet 
corn seed which involve the use of top crosses, inbreds, 
and hybrid inbreds. The seed produced has proved 
superior in yield and uniformity and has shown great 
possibilities in respect to disease resistance. The future 
alone will determine to how great an extent seed pro- 
duced by these methods will replace the named varieties 
we have known for so long. 

The organizations which originated the first-year 



crosses have under their control the various inbred stocks 
necessary to perpetuate the hybrid. The inbreds must 
be maintained and the cross made each year. There is, 
therefore, considerably greater cost in producing seed 
of these stocks in comparison to the regular commercial 
varieties. The grower will have to determine after a 
trial whether or not the higher cost of seed will be com- 
pensated by higher yields and a higher quality product. 
It has been determined that the reaction of hybrid corn 
to a particular set of environmental conditions is very 
specific; thus, it may be necessary to test out many 
hybrids before the strain best suited is secured. 

There are several of these new " combination varie- 
ties " ready for the grower. Bantam Evergreen Hybrid, 
Country Gentleman Hybrid, Crosgreen, Green Cross, 
Golden Cross, Golden Cross Bantam, Kingscrost, Narrow 
Grain Hybrid, Redgreen, Tendergold, Top Cross Bantam, 
and Stowell's Evergreen Hybrid are some of the first 
names that have been chosen for the representative 
types. 

All of the varieties considered in this text could not 
have originated or been introduced without careful work 
on the part of many individuals. The incompleteness 
of this list is to be regretted, but information on this 
aspect of the history of sweet corn varieties is exceedingly 
meagre. Some of the outstanding men are H. C. 
Anthony, C. A. Barden, Fearing Burr, Jr., Luther 
Burbank, C. S. Clark, Everett B. Clark, William Cory, 
Josiah Crosby, Noyes Darling, Dr. Frederick S. De Lue, 
J. J. H. Gregory, D. F. Jones, A. C. Kendel, Capt. 
J. B. Moore, Arthur L. Richie, T. F. Ritchie, Thomas 
Potter, H. J. Seymour. G. M. Smith, Henry Stabler, 
Nathan Stowell, Silas Whipple, and A. F. Yeager. 



CHAPTER II 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF MAIZE, AND ITS ALLIES 

Of all the plants grown for food throughout the ' Ten species are now recognized of which S. offi- 

cinarum L., the sugar cane, is the most important. 
Grown chiefly for the production of sugar and molasses 
but to some extent for forage, it is noted here merely 
as being somewhat distantly related to maize. 

2. SORGHUM Moench, Meth. 207. 1794.— 
Holcus L. Sp. PL 1047. 1753, in part. — Blumen- 
bachia Koel. Descr. Gram. 28. 1802. 

Perennial or annual grasses with spikelets (except the terminal) 
in pairs, one sessile, perfect and awned, the other pedicelled, awn- 
less, and usually staminate, the terminal sessile spikelet with two 
pedicellate spikelets; the spikelets arranged in terminal panicles 
of one to five tardily disjointing racemes. 

There are about six species of which two are culti- 
vated in the United States, chiefly in the South. S. 
halepensis, Johnson grass, is a forage grass. S. vul- 



■world, it is probable that the most valuable and most 
widely cultivated are the six grasses — maize or Indian 
corn, wheat, oats, barley, rye, and rice — the value of 
the crops being approximately in the order shown. 
The sweet corn, treated in this part of The Vegetables 
of New York, is a group of sweet -kerneled varieties 
of that complex and variable species, maize. 

Maize, as will be shown in the following pages, is 
undoubtedly the most highly specialized species in the 
plant family Gramineae. It is placed by systematic 
botanists in the subfamily Panicatae, tribe Tripsaceae. 
Its closest allies are naturally some of the other members 
of that tribe, but it also shows a very close relationship 
with many of the species of the closely allied tribe 
Andropogoneae. In fact, Hitchcock 1 says, " This 



tribe. ; referring to Tripsaceae] is scarcely more than £are Pers., sorghum or sorgo, has many races or varieties 
a division of the next tribe, Andropogoneae." This 
question is discussed more fully under the descriptions 
of the various genera. The relationship of the more 
important of these plants is shown in the following key. 



KEY TO GENERA OF IMPORTANT ALLIES OF MAIZE 
Spikelets bisexual wholly or in part, in pairs occasionally in 3's 
generally one sessile and with both stamens and pistil i perfect 
or bisexual and the other pedicelled and perfect or not. 
Andropogoneae in part.) 
Pedicellate spikelet perfect as is the sessile one, both awnless. 

1. Sacoharuni 
Pedicellate spikelet staminate but without pistil, sessile spikelet 
perfect: 
Spikelets awned, pedicel not thickened, the racemes mostly 

forming a compound panicle 2. Sorghum 

Spikelets awnless, pedicels thickened and appressed to the 

thickened rachis joint 3. Manisuris 

Spikelets unisexual, the staminate generally in pairs, one sessile and 

the other pedicelled, the pistillate spikelets separate from the 

staminate in the same or in a distinct spike Tripsaceae in part ; 

Staminate and pistillate spikelets on separate portions of the 

same spike, the pistillate portion of the long many-flowered 

spike breaking up into several one-seeded joints. 

I. Tripsacum 
Staminate spikelets in separate spikes forming terminal tassels, 
the pistillate forming spikes in the axils of the leaves: 
Pistillate spikes distinct, imbedded in the hardened floral axis. 

5. Euchlaena 
Pistillate spikes aggregated in an ear surrounded by numerous 
husks, the floral axes grown together forming a cob 

6. Zea 

1. SACCHARUM L. Sp. PI. 54. 1753. 

Perennial grasses with spikelets in pairs, one of each pair 
pedicelled and the other sessile, both perfect flowered, awnless, 
arranged in panicled racemes, the axis disjointing below the spike- 
lets; glumes somewhat hardened, the sterile lemma similar but 
hyaline: fertile lemma hyaline if present.- 



grown under the names of broom corn, chicken corn, 
durra, feterita, kafir-corn, Kaoliang, milo, shallu, sorgo, 
and Sudan grass. The relationship of these plants to 
maize has been stated by Weatherwax 3 as follows: 
" It is unfortunate . . . that monoecism (i. e. the 
bearing of pistillate and staminate flowers on different 
parts of the plant) was adopted as a unifying charac- 
teristic in forming the Tripsaceae. ... A thor- 
ough morphological study of the Andropogoneae may 
ultimately show that maize and the sorghums represent 
one branch, and Tripsacum, Euchlaena, and Rott- 
boellia [Manisuris] another, of the descendants of 
some common stock. The oriental Tripsaceae con- 
stitute almost a separate tribe." 

3. MANISURIS L. Mant. 2:164. 1771. 

Perennial grasses with awnless spikelets in pairs, one sessile 
and perfect, the other pedicelled and staminate, the pedicel thickened 
and appressed to the rachis; the spikes thus becoming narrow and 
cylindrical or nearly so; more or less leathery glumes, lemmas and 
palea thin, enclosed within a pedicelled spikelet, often rudimentary. 

Of the numerous species of this genus none have 
attained sufficient economic importance to acquire a 
common English name. It is here noted solely because 
of its relationships and the mention made to it heretofore. 

t. TRIPSACUM L. Syst. Nat. ed. 10. 2:1261. 
1759. — Gama grass and its allies. — Dactylodes Zanoni- 
Monti ex Kuntze, Rev. Gen. PI. 2:772. 1891. 

Perennial grasses with unisexual spikelets; the staminate 
spikelets 2 -flowered, in pairs, one sessile and the other pedicelled 
or sessile, similar to those of Zea, glumes firmer; the pistillate 
spikelets single and on opposite sides of a jointed thickened rachis, 
the lower portion of the same spike, and consisting of a perfect 
floret and a sterile lemma; glumes more or less leathery; lemmas 
and palea thin and hyaline. 



•Hitchcock, A. S. A Text-book of Grasses, 158. Macmillan. 1922. 

5 The generic descriptions given here are adapted from Hitchcock, A. S. The Genera of Grasses of the United States. United States 
Dept. Agr. Bui. 772. 1920. 

3 Weatherwax, Paul. hoc. cit. 30. 

9 



10 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



There are about seven species of this genus, all 
American. Gama grass itself, T. dactyloides, L., has 
the widest range of the species found in the United 
States, occurring from Connecticut to Florida and 
Texas. Concerning its relationship with maize, Weather- 
wax 1 says, " The clearest and most reasonable deduction 
from the facts at hand is that Zea, Euchlaena, and 
Tripsacum descended directly and independently, in so 
far as hybridization is concerned, from a common 
ancestor now extinct." Maize has produced hybrids 
with Tripsacum when the pollen of the latter was used 
on silks of Maize. The reciprocal cross has not been 
successful. Mangelsdorf and Reeves'-' of the Texas 
Experiment Station have written an interesting account 
of their difficulties in procuring a few fertile seeds of 
this cross. 

5. EUCHLAENA Schrad. Jnd. Sem. Hort. 
Goer r. 1832. — Teosinte. 

Annual or perennial grasses with unisexual spikelets; the 
staminate spikelets similar to those of Zea: the pistillate somewhat 
similar to those of Tripsacum, but in separate spikes enclosed in 
husks, single, sunken in cavities on opposite sides of a jointed rachis, 
the hardened first glume covering the cavity; second glume mem- 
branaceous, lemmas hyaline; 2 to several pistillate spikes enclosed 
in a single leaf sheath. 

There are two species of teosinte, the perennial, 
E. perennis Hitchc, and the annual, E. mexicana 
Schrad. This latter has two forms, the Floridan and 
the Mexican. Numerous crosses of E. mexicana and 
maize have been made and are fertile. Very few crosses 
have been made between maize and perennial teosinte. 
These are nearly all sterile. It has been suggested that 
annual teosinte may have arisen from a cross between 
perennial teosinte and maize, but proof is not forth- 
coming as yet. 

6. ZEA L. Sp. PL 971. 1753.— Maize.— Mow 
Adans. Fam. 2:39. 1763. Mays. Gaertn. Frucr. 
et Sem. 1:6. 1788. Mayzea Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 
1830. Thalysia Kuntze, Rev. Gen. 2:794. 1891. 

Annual grass with unisexual spikelets, the staminate ones, 
2-flowered, in pairs, one of each pair nearly sessile, the other pedi- 
celled; glumes membranaceous; lemma and palea hyaline; pistillate 
spikelets sessile, in pairs, consisting of one fertile and one sterile 
floret, or occasionally of two fertile florets; glumes broad and rounded 
or emarginate at apex; style very long and slender. 

Only one species, Zea Mays L., is known. It is 
discussed in detail in the following paragraphs. Unfor- 
tunately, many of the earlier investigators thought that 
every variation in the plants should have a scientific 
name, and consequently, a very abundant synonomy 
grew up. These names, placed in groups as nearly as 
can be determined on the basis of the often meagre 
descriptions, are given at the end of this chapter. 

The corn plant in general structure is like other 
grasses with some interesting differences in a few details. 
The roots like those of other grasses are fibrous, never 
very large in diameter but often up to 5 or 6 feet in 
length. The first rootlet from the germinating seed 
is soon supplemented by two or three secondary roots 



from the first node of the stem and these, too, soon lose 
their importance as longer and larger roots arise from 
successively higher nodes. As the plant begins to 
develop its greatest growth, brace, prop, or buttress roots 
usually begin to appear from the first few nodes above 
the ground level. These are thicker and stronger than 
the roots produced below ground level but otherwise 
have the same structure. They vary in different 
strains of corn. 

The stem consists of a series of sections divided by 
swollen portions or nodes. The intervening portions, 
internodes, between each pair of nodes bear a leaf at the 
upper end and a bud or at least bud tissues, at the lower 
end. This bud may or may not develop into a branch. 
The internodes are filled with pith as in the Andro- 
pogoneae, but unlike those of most other grasses which 
are generally hollow. The growth of the internodes 
is similar, however, there being some capacity for 
increase in thickness in very young internodes and 
always capacity for increasing in length from the grow- 
ing region at the base of each internode. The growth in 
length ordinarily slows up and gradually ceases as the 
plant matures but may continue if the plant is blown 
over by the wind or thrown on the ground by other 
accidents. 

The leaf of maize like that of most other grasses 
shows three distinct portions. The first portion is a 
cylindrical sheath split down one side and with edges 
more or less overlapping throughout its length. This 
split often does not open until above the second node. 
It has been suggested that the sheath is homologous 
to the swollen base of the leaf stalks of the maple, for 
instance. In any case it serves to strengthen the stem 
and to protect the growing region of the next higher 
internode. The second portion is a long, flat, strap- 
shaped blade with a strong midrib and numerous smaller 
veins parallel to it. The blade tapers to a point at the 
tip and is more or less heart-shaped at the base where 
it meets the sheath, having generally a distinct lobe or 
auricle at each side. The third portion is a thin mem- 
branaceous collar, the ligule, which arises at the upper 
side of the juncture of the sheath and blade. It fits 
closely about the next internode thus protecting the 
latter from water, dust, and spores. The leaves are 
arranged in two ranks. 

The buds on the lower internodes may develop 
large branches, suckers, or tillers, similar to the main 
stem, while one or more of those of the middle inter- 
nodes produce short ear-bearing branches. The buds 
of the upper nodes may grow into small branches often 
not attaining the length of the enveloping sheath or 
may remain entirely dormant. 

The terminal section of the main stem (and some- 
times those of the suckers or tillers) develops into a 
staminate inflorescence or tassel, while the terminal 
section of some of the short middle branches develops 
into pistillate inflorescences or ears. 

The tassel differs radically from the main stem below 



1 Weatherwax, Paul. Loc. cit. 30. 

'■ Mangelsdorf, P. C, and Reeves, R. G. 



Hybridization of Maize, Tripsacum, and Euchlaena. Jour. Heredity. 22:329 {{. 1931. 






SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF MAIZE, AND ITS ALLIES 



11 



it in that its branches are arranged spirally instead of 
in two ranks. Occasionally the tassel is not branched, 
but more often it shows secondary branching. The 
size and amount of branching of the tassel are more 
or less dependent on the vigor of the plant. The central 
spike of the tassel is remarkable in that the paired spike- 
lets are arranged in several rows, whereas the lateral 
branches have the pairs of spikelets in two rows. 

The ear resembles the central portion of the spike in 
that the paired spikelets are borne in several longitudinal 
rows. This peculiar arrangement of central spike and 
ear seems not to be homologous with the structure 
among other grasses and presents one of the baffling 
obstacles in the discovery of the origin of maize. The 
husks of the ear are merely leaf sheaths, often with 
somewhat reduced blades and ligules borne on very 
short internodes below the pistillate spike. 





Fig. 1. — A, Pair of spikelets from a tassel of Independ- 
ence !x5 diam. . This shows in the partially opened upper 
spikelet. The glumes, G; the lemma of the upper floret, 
L : the tip of the palea, P; and parts of the three 
anthers, A. 

B, A semi-diagrammatic section through the same 
floret, showing the glumes, G; the lemma of each floret, L; 
the palea of each, P : the filaments of both sets of stamens, F; 
the anthers of one floret, A; the rudiments of the aborted 
pistils, P; and the position of one lodicule in each floret, 
Lo. The filaments of the second floret are drawn as they 
appear after the anthers have been extruded, cast their pol- 
len, and fallen off. It should be noted, however, that the 
upper floret generally develops first. 

In corn, as in other grasses (and in asters and chry- 
santhemums with their allies), the unit of the inflor- 
escence is not the single flower but a group of flowers. 
In grasses this unit is the spikelet which generally con- 
sists of a more or less short axis at or near the base and 
on opposite sides of which are two glumes, bract-like 
or scale-like structures, one slightly higher than the 
other; and above these glumes one or more florets each 
having an outer scale, the lemma, and an inner scale, 
the palea, the latter inclosing the pistil and stamens 
and two or three fleshy scales, the lodicules. All 
variations from this typical spikelet are due to enhanced 
development or abortion of some of the parts. In maize 
and many of its allies the spikelets occur in pairs and 
each contains two florets, or, at least, one complete 
floret and the rudiment of a second. The staminate 



spikelet of maize (as shown in fig. 1) has one spikelet of 
each pair pedicelled and the other sessile or nearly so. 
The membranaceous but firm glumes are nearly of 
equal length. The upper floret develops earlier than 
the lower. The lemma and palea are hyaline and 
nearly as long as the glumes. The two lodicules are 
at the back of the floret, and help spread open the 
glumes at time of flowering. There is a rudimentary 
pistil. The pistillate spikelet (fig. 2) is ordinarily 
greatly modified, the glumes being thick and fleshy 
and not completely enclosing the other parts. The 
lower floret is generally very rudimentary and the 
lemma and palea of the upper floret are shorter than the 
glumes. The lodicules of the upper floret are generally 
not as well developed as those of the lower. 

There are numerous anomalies in maize inflor- 
escences; perfect flowers occasionally being found, 



Gi-- 





C P2 



Fig. 2. — A, A single pistillate spikelet from young cob of 
Adams Extra Early x7 ', diam. I, showing the lower portion 
of the style (silk), St: the first and second glumes, G 1 and 
G : ; and a small portion of the floral axis or cob, C. 

B, A semi-diagraminatic section of the same spike- 
let (xlS diam.), showing the basal portion of the style, St; 
the glumes, G 1 and G-; the lemma and palea of the aborted 
floret, L : and P 1 : the aborted ovary (pistil' and stamen of 
this floret, O 1 and S 1 ; the lemma and palea of the developed 
upper floret, L c and P : : the fully developed ovary and 
aborted stamen of the upper floret, O- and S-; and the 
position of the cob, C. 

pistillate flowers in the tassel and staminate flowers 
on the ear being more common. Spikelets of more 
than two flowers are sometimes found; and in varieties 
such as Country Gentleman both florets of each spikelet 
are fully developed. 

The styles (silks) of the pistillate flowers are usually 
receptive to pollen for two weeks or more after they 
emerge from the husks. Although the lower flowers 
start growth about a week before the upper ones, the 
actual time of emergence of silk varies little more than 
48 hours at most because of the distance that the lower 
silks must grow. The shedding of pollen from a tassel 
lasts from two or three days to as many weeks due to 
the fact that the upper branches mature before the 
lower ones, the tips before the base, and the lower 
florets of each spikelet before the upper ones. 

While technically each grain is a true fruit — a 



12 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



caryopsis, like that of other grasses, in which the fruit 
coats are united with the seed coat — nevertheless the 
whole ear is ordinarily considered as a single compound 
fruit. 

It is almost entirely on the basis of the grains that 
the modern horticultural classification is built, though 
types are recognized on the basis of other characters. 
The characteristics of the various types are so easily 
subject to separations and recombinations by the plant 
breeder that the attempt to classify corn varieties into 
definite botanical subspecies is thought by most recent 
students to be futile. Some of the older botanists, 
unaware of the havoc that geneticists of the near future 
would wreak upon their pet schemes of classification, 
did, however, describe various so-called species and 
varieties until the number of names became very 
unwieldy and many of them quite meaningless. 

M. Bonafous, in 1836, in his Histoire naturelle, 
agricole, et economique du Mais, seems to have 
been the first to attempt a classification of maize varieties, 
though there had been many treatments of various 
forms before that. However, his monograph remains a 
notable landmark in the literature of maize. 

In 1866, Frederich Alefeld, in his Landwirtschaft- 
liche Flora, attempted a more ambitious classification 
in which he described 50 varieties under six variety- 
groups. These are rather artificial as the first contained 
extraordinary types; the second, dwarf types; the third, 
branched types; the fourth, those with conical ears; 
the fifth, ordinary European field types; and the sixth. 
North American varieties of numerous kinds. 

In 1873, Friedrich Kornicke, in his Systematische 
Ubersicht der Cerealen, etc., classified 64 varieties 
under 5 variety-groups. These were somewhat more 
natural than those of Alefeld. The first included extra- 
ordinary types; the second, concerning which mention 
has been made in the preceding chapter, included the 
sweet corn varieties; the third included dent corn types; 
the fourth, pop corns and other small-kerneled types; 
and the fifth all other types. Kornicke revised this 
system slightly in 1885 in the Handbuch des 
Getreidebaues. 

From 1881 to 1899, E. L. Sturtevant, who was 
director of this Station during part of that time, published 
a number of articles dealing with the classification of 
maize and named, as " agricultural species," the pod 
corns, pop corns, sweet corns, flint corns, dent corns, 
starchy-sweet corns, and soft corns. 

These names have some use as designating groups 
of horticultural varieties adapted for various purposes, 
as some of the other names that have been proposed 
have a certain degree of utility in designating types of 
value to the floriculturist or the geneticist. However, 



these names do not signify subspecies or botanical 
varieties, though some of them might be designated 
properly as " formae." 

The reason for not admitting as botanical entities 
such varieties as those proposed by Alefeld, Kornicke, 
and Sturtevant is that usually the varieties classified 
in one group can, with equal justice, be disposed in one 
or more of the other groups. This is illustrated 
admirably by Weatherwax 1 who, in discussing endosperm 
varieties, says, " Sweet corn is apparently the same as 
other varieties except that it has lost its ability to pro- 
duce fully developed starch grains. Hybridization of 
sweet varieties with soft starchy varieties produces 
grains indicating that sweet corn may be differentiated 
into soft, flinty, and dent varieties that cannot synthe- 
size starch efficiently." Pop corns are likewise generally 
small kerneled flint types; and pod corns, dwarf corns, 
and variegated leaf types, as well as ramose types and 
so on, may occur in any of the other forms. 

However, since many of these terms have found 
their way into common usage and into the general 
literature of maize, an attempt is here made to list, 
as far as possible, the Latin names that have been 
applied to the various groups. Those names, the 
applications of which are very doubtful, are grouped at 
the end. 

The synonymy- of maize follows: 

ZEA MAYS L. SP. PL. 971. 1753.— MAIZE. 

1. Synonyms of general application to the species as a whole: 

Zea americana Mill. Gard. Diet. ed. 8. No. 1. 1768; Zea 
alba Mill. /. c. No. 2: Zea vulgaris Mill. /. c. No. 3; Mays Zea 
Gaertn. Fruct. et Sem. 1:6. 1788; Zea Maiz Veil. Fl. Flum. 
10:t.3. 1790; Zea segetalis Salisb. Prod. 28. 1796: Mays vulgaris 
Ser. Mel. Bot. 2:182. 1819; Zea altissima Gmel. ex Steud. 
Nom. Bot. ed. 1. 898. 1821; Mayzea cerealis Raf. Med. Fl. 
2:241. 1830; Mays americana Baumg. Enum. Stirp. Transs. 
3:281. 1840; Zea mats Alef. Landw. Fl. 303. 1866; Thalysia 
Mays Kuntze, Rev. Gen. 2:794. 1891. 

2. Endosperm forms: 

(,ai Dent com. — Zea Mays quasquinensis Bonaf. Hist. 
Nat. Mais. 37. 1836; Zea Mays quillotensis Bonaf. /. c. 38; 
Zea Mays leucodon Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866; Zea Mays 
xanthodon Alef. 1. c: Zea Mays pyrodon Alef. /. c: Zea Mays 
dentiformis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873; Zea Mays alborubra 
Korn. /. c; Zea Mays flavorubra Korn. /. c; Zea Mays crocodon 
Korn. /. c. 24; Zea Mays crococeras Korn. /. c; Zea Mays stria- 
tidens Korn. /. c; Zea Mays rubrostriata Korn. /. c; Zea Mays 
poikilodon Korn. /. c; Zea indentata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 
20:443. 1883; Maize, 8. 1884. Zea Mays cyanodon Korn. in 
Korn. &Wem. Handb. Getreid. 1:362. 1885; Zea Mays rubro- 
vestita Korn. 1. c; Zea Mays rubrovelata Korn. /. c: Zea 
Mays chilena Korn. /. c. 375; Zea Mays indentata Bailey, Cycl. 
Am. Hort. 2006. 1902; Zea Mays dentiformis leucoceras Ray- 
baud, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol. 81:196. 1921. 

ib) Flint corn. — Zea Mays vulgaris Bonaf. Hist. Nat. 
Mais. 31. 1836; Zea Mays vulgaris aestiva Bonaf. /. c: Zea Mays 
vulgaris autumna Bonaf. /. c. 32; Zea Mays pensylvanica 



1 Weatherwax, Paul. hoc. cit. 159. 1923. 

■ Each synonym is given but once in the following list, even though in some cases it is evident that tile form designated might equally 
well be placed in another class, as is the case with some of the dwarf forms which are pod corns, or flint corns, or other types as well. Many 
of the original descriptions are very inadequate, and the names may be placed in groups to which others might have been preferred if a full 
description were available. It cannot be hoped that all varietal names are here noted, although a strenuous effort has been made to list 
all that have been published. The literature is voluminous and there is no index to varietal names comparable to the Kew Index of specific 
names. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF MAIZE. AND ITS ALLIES 



13 



Bonaf. /. c. 33: Zca Mays canariensis Bonaf. /. c. 34; Zea Mays 
graeca Bonaf. /. c: Zea Mays syrtica Bonaf. /. c; Zca Mays 
subpraccox Bonaf. /. c. 35; Zca Mays hispanica Bonaf. /. c; 
Zca Mays autumna Bonaf. /. c. 37; Zca Mays virginica Bonaf. 
/. c: Zca Mays rubra Bonaf. /. c. 40: Zea Mays versicolor Bonaf. 
/. c: Zca Mays COrynula Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866: Zea Mays 
compressa Alef. /. c: Zea Mays aestiva Alef. /. c; Zea Mays 
autumnalis Alef. /. c. 308; Zea Mays crinusa Alef. /. c. 309; 
Zca Mays alba Alef. /. c; Zca Mays quinquantina Alef. /. c: 
Zca Mays pyrocarpa Alef. /. c. 310: Zea Mays striata Alef. /. c; 
Zea Mays cacsia Alef. /. c; Zea Mays nigra Alef. /. c: Zea 
Mays multicolor Alef. /. c: Zi'<j Mays latissitna Alef. /. c. 311; 
Zea Mays leucoceras Alef. /. c; Zca Mays pyroceras Alef. /. c; 
Zca Mays vulgata Korn. Sysf. Uebers. 26. 1873: Zea .Mays 
vulgata autumnalis Korn. /. c: Zca Mays vulgata macroxantha 
Korn. /. c: Zea .Mays vulgata pensylvanica Bonaf). Korn. 1. c; 
Zea Mays gilva Korn. /. c. 27; Zea Mays Philippi Korn. /. c; 
Zea Mays rubropaleata Korn. /. c: Zea Mays rubropunctata 
Korn. /. c: Zea Mays violacea Korn. /. c: Zea Mays rubrovio- 
laceae Korn. /. c: Zca Mays rubrocaesia Korn. /. c; Zea Mays 
trisris Korn. /. c; Zea Mays flavoalba Korn. /. c. 28: Zea Mays 
nigrorubra Kom. /. c; Zea indurata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 
120:443. 1883: Maize, 8. 1884; Zea Mays cyanca Korn. in Korn. 
& Wem. Handb. Getreid. 1:363. 1885; Zea Mays var. indurata 
Bailey. Cycl. Am. Hort. 2005. 1902. 

c Pop corn. — Zea Mays rostrata Bonaf. Compt. Rendu 
Acad. Sci. Paris 1:683. 1842: Zea Curagua Molina, Sagg. Chil. 
129. 1782: Zea hirta Bonaf. Ann. Sci. Nat. I. 17:158. 1829; 
Zea Caragua Steud. Nom. ed. 2: 797. 1841. sphalm.: Zca tnucro- 
nata Poit. ex Vilm. in Rev. Hort. II. 5:245. 1844; Zea Mays 
curagua Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866: Zea Mays hirta Alef. 
/. c. 309: Zea Mays leucornis Alef. /. c. 311; Zea Mais glaucornis 
Alef. /. c: Zea Mays rhodornis Alef. /. c: Zea Mays hacmatornis 
Alef. /. c: Zea Mays microsperma Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873; 
Zea Mays oryzoides Korn. /. c; Zea Mays oxyornis Korn. /. c; 
Zea Mays xanthornis Korn. /. c; Zea Mays melanornis Korn. 
1. c: Zea mays rosea Korn. /. c. 25; Zea Mays lilacina Korn. 
/. c; Zea Mays coerulca Kom. /. c: Zea Mays rubronigra 
Korn. /. c: Zea Mays poikilornis Korn. /. c: Zea Mays mucro- 
nata Wittmack, Zeitschr. Ethn. 12:95. 1880; Zea everta Sturt. 
Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883. Maize, 8. 1884; Zea Mays var. 
everta Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 4:2005. 1902. 

d Soft corn. — Zea Mays erythrolepis Alef. Landw. Fl. 
304. 1866: Zca erythrolepis Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais 30. 1836; 
Zea macrosperma Klotzsch, Bot. Zeit. 9:718. 1851; Zea Mays 
mirabilis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873: Zea Mays macrosperma 
Korn. /. c; Zea amylacea Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; 
Maize. 8. 1884: Zea Mays cuzcoensis Korn. in Korn. & Wern. 
Handb. Getreid. 1:361. 1885; Zea amyleasaccharata Sturt. 
N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. 5th Ann. Rpt. 1886) 66. 1887: Zea Mays 
var. amylacea Bailey, Cycl. Ant. Hort. 2006. 1902; Zea Mays 
var. amyleasaccharata Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 2006. 1902. 

e Sweet corn. — Zea Mays rugosa Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais 
39. 1836; Zea Mays saccharata Korn. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873; 
Zea Mays dulcis Korn. /. c; Zea Mays uberior Korn. /. c; 
Zea Mays flavodulcis Korn. /. c; Zea Mays rubrodulcis Korn. 
/. c. 23; Zea Mays coeruleodulcis Korn. /. c: Zea Mays vario- 
dulcis Korn. /. c: Zea Mays striatodulcis Kom. /. c; Zea 
saccharata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; Maize. 8. 1884; 
Zea Mays rubentidulcis Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Handb. Get- 
reid. 1:361. 1885; Zea Mays lilacinodulcis Korn. /. c.; Zea 
Mays recens Korn. /. c. 375; Zea Mays atrodulcis Korn. /. c; 
Zea saccharina Rollins, Horticulture 27:247. 1918. 

3. Dwarf corn: 

Zea Mays precox Torr. in Eaton, Man. Bot. ed. 2. 500. 1818. 
Zea Mays praecox. Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 32. 1836; Zea Mays 



minima Bonaf. /. c; Zea Mays cymosa Bonaf. /. c. 38; Zea 
Mays nana Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866; Zea Mays leucopais 
Alef. /. c; Zea Mays erythropais Alef. /. c; Zea Mays glauco- 
pais Alef. /. c; Zea Mays poecilopais Alef. /. c. 306; Zca Mays 
gracillima Kom. Syst. Uebers. 24, 1873; Zea gracillima " Hort." 
Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 1:2004. 1902; Zea minima " Hort." 
Bailey, /. c. 

4. Pod corn: 

Zea Mays var. tunicata Larr. ex St. Hil. Ann. Sci. Nat. 
16:143. 1829; Mayzea vestita Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 1830; Zea 
cryptosperma Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 30. 1836: Zea vaginata 
Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; Zea indentata var. vagi- 
nata Sturt. Maize, 8. 1884; Zea indurata var. vaginata, Sturt. 
/. c; Zea Mays involuta Kom. in Kom. & Wem. Handb. Getreid. 
1:361, 1885; Zea Mays var. vaginata Sturt. TV. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. 
3rd Rpt. 18841 186. 1885. Zea tunicata Sturt. Bull. Torr. 
Bot. Club. 21:335. 1894. 

5. Variegated-leafed forms: 

Zea Mays japonica Kom. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873; Zea 
japonica Van Houtte, Fl. des Serres, 16:121. 1868; Zca Mays 
var. variegata Nichols. Diet. Gard. 1:238. 1887; Zea gigantea 
foliis-variegata Nichols. Diet. Gard. 1:608. 1888; Zea vittata 
"Hort." Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 1:2004. 1902. Zea japonica 
var. vittata " Hort." Bailey, Man. Cult. PI. 104. 1924. 

6. Ramose forms: 

Zea Mays polystachytes Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 36. 1836; 
Zea Mays ramosa Schur, Oesfr. Bot. Zeitschr. 9:11. 1859; 
Zea Mays potyxantha Alef. Landw. Fl. 306. 1866; Zea Mays 
polerythra Alef. 1. c; Zea Mays polyleuca Alef. /. c; Zea ramosa 
Gernert, Am. Nat. 16:616. 1912. 

7. Polysperm forms: 

Zea Mays polysperma Blar. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 
Paris 170:677. 1930. 

8. Fossil form: 

Zea antiqua Knowlton, Journ. Wash. Acad. Sci. 9:135. 
1919. 

9. Hybrid teosinte x Maize): 

Zea canina S. Wats. Proc. Am. Acad. 26: 160. 1891. 

10. Miscellaneous or unidentified forms: 

Zea minor Gmel. ex Steud. Nom. ed. 1. 898. 1821: Zea 
praecox Pers. ex Steud. /. c: Mayzea cerealis var. gigantea 
Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 1830; Zea Mays turgida Bonaf. Hist. Nat. 
Mais. 34. 1836; Zea Mays maxima Hassk. Flora 25': Beibl. 
1. p. 2. 1842; Zea Mays pallida Hassk. 1. c.\ Zea Mays rubra 
Hassk. /. c; Zea Mays minor Hassk. /. c: Zea Mays minima 
Hassk. /. c: Zea Mays hawarah Hassk. 1. c; Zea Mays acrogyna 
Schur. Oesfr. Bot. Zeitschr. 9:11. 1859; Zea Mays excellens 
Alef. Landw. Fl. 304. 1866; Zea Mays conica Alef. Landw. Fl. 
306. 1866; Zea Mays pyracea Alef. I. c. 307: Zea Mays glaucops 
Alef. /. c: Zea Mays europaea Alef. /. c; Zea Mays americana 
Alef. /. c. 310; Zea Mays androgyna Schur. Enum. PI. Transs. 
720. 1866; Zea Mays humilis Schur. /. c; Zea Mays leucosperma 
Schur. /. c: Zea Mays perlata Schur. /. c: Zea Mays microsperma 
Schur. /. c; Zea Mays macrosperma Schur. /. c; Zca Mays 
symetrica Schur. /. c: Zea Mays tesselata Schur. /. c: Zea Mays 
chinensis Schur. /. c: Zea Mays tincta OK. Taschen-Fl. Leipzig. 
52, 1867; Zea Mays acuminata Kom. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873; 
Zca Mays pungens Korn. /. c; Zea Mays diasacchara Korn. 
/. c. 24; Zea Mays turgida fasciata Kom. 1. c. 27: Zea Mays 
dierythra Korn. 1. c: Zea Mays alboflava Korn. /. c: Zea Mays 
leucodiasacchara Korn. /. c. 28; Zea Mays erythrodiasacchara 
Korn. /. c; Zea Mays poikilodiasacchara Kom. /. c; Zea Mays 
Peruviana Wittmack, Zeitschr. Ethn. 12:95. 1880. 



CHAPTER III 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 
GENERAL NOTES 



The discussion of varieties in this publication refers 
primarily to sweet corn, Zea Mays rugosa Bonaf., 
although some mention is made of varieties in other 
groups or forms of maize grown in certain sections for 
the same purpose. 

The data upon which the major descriptions are 
based were obtained in extensive variety trials over a 
period of five years. This work was started in 1928 and 
brought to completion in 1932. An earnest endeavor 
was made to grow at least one strain of each available 
variety each year and in many instances two or more 
strains of each of the leading varieties were grown 
for type comparison. In addition to this work, records 
were available in the annual reports of this Station for 
the years 1884 to 1886. These records represent 
Sturtevant's work and have proved to be of great value 
in the discussion of old varieties not grown today. 

Various trial grounds, both of seed organizations 
and of agricultural experiment stations, were visited 
from time to time by one or more of the authors for 
the purpose of observing the same varieties under 
different conditions as well as to gain first-hand informa- 
tion on varieties not always successfully grown at 
Geneva. The gardens of J. B. Rice Seed Co., Cambridge, 
New York; Ferry Morse Seed Co., Detroit, Michigan; 
Associated Seed Growers, New Haven, Connecticut; 
Massachusetts State College of Agriculture, Amherst, 
Massachusetts; and Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, offered such opportunities. 

The 24 full -page photographs of the white and 
yellow varieties serve to indicate the several types which 
have been in existence rather than to illustrate the 
leading varieties either historically or those grown in 
various sections of the country. Although some of the 
types shown are not true sweet corns, their use for this 
purpose in certain areas warrants their appearance in 
this publication. One plate is used to illustrate the 
variation existing in dry kernel characteristics of the crop. 

Various methods of measuring differences and 
comparing similarities have been advanced by those 
interested in varietal studies. Each system has been 
devised to fit particular demands, and therefore is of 
value for the use intended. Much discussion has 
been brought forth concerning the merits or imper- 
fections of each, but when considered from the stand- 
point of adaptability an effort should be made to appre- 
ciate the needs and recognize the scope of them all. 
Statistical analysis of plant, fruit, or root characters 
undoubtedly shows very definitely the average of a 
given group. Yet the multiplicity of the detailed 
measurements and consequent tedious interpretation 
of records, necessarily confines such work to relatively 



few varieties. The number and code system is very 
definite and concise in its operation. When the note taker 
becomes thoroughly imbued with its exact meaning, 
the process of recording becomes quite mechanical. 
When used in conjunction with crops to which it is 
most suited, its value becomes definitely assured. It 
does not, however, lend itself with equal adaptability 
to all crops. This fact, together with the additional 
interpretation necessary before a clear account can be 
written, furthermore limits its possibilities for use when 
200, more or less, varieties of several crops must be 
considered in a given season. In view of the limitations 
of previously used methods, a more easily applied 
system was devised to meet the requirements at Geneva. 
Its shortcomings are recognized, yet under our con- 
ditions, where a large number of varieties and strains 
must be grown for the project intended, it serves the 
purpose adequately. 

The system for making and recording observations 
incident to the preparation of this monograph is based 
on four operations. The known description and origin 
of each variety and strain were carefully studied. The 
information derived from this study made it possible 
to arrange all seed samples in a definite numerical 
order based on similarity in type and number of days 
to edible maturity. Due to many unknown samples, 
the first year or so of the trials were not very successful 
in this procedure, but after preliminary knowledge con- 
cerning the comparative earliness of the varieties was 
obtained, a more perfect arrangement was possible. 
The various samples were planted in three 24-foot rows 
each, in order to insure good pollination. The arrange- 
ment in the field followed the numerical order mentioned 
above. This not only facilitated note taking, but 
rendered questionable strains and varieties readily 
available with those of like season for the purpose of 
comparison. 

In order to determine more accurately when a given 
variety had reached a certain stage in its development, 
a system of tagging was devised. When at least 50 per 
cent of the individuals of a variety had attained a 
given stage of development, three normal plants were 
marked with numbered tags and the date recorded in a 
book made for the purpose. It was on these three 
individuals that the date records of the variety were 
considered. The trial ground was examined every 
day in order to determine when each tagged plant had 
reached a particular stage. Five stages were recorded, 
viz., tassel emergence (when the tassel started to emerge, 
but before the lateral spikelets began to unfold), pollen 
shed, silk emergence, milk period, and dough period. 
By this method the exact number of days between 



14 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



15 



various stages in representative individual plants could 
be ascertained. Thus the possibility of securing inac- 
curate records from general observation of any given 
stage was eliminated. The average of the three plants 
was determined and thereafter used as an index of the 
particular manifestation involved. 

The recording of plant and ear characters was 
accomplished at definite periods on previously prepared 
descriptive cards. All possible characters of value were 
printed under the respective headings. At the time a 
given plant part had reached a certain stage, the appro- 
priate terms referring to the part were underlined. By 
a system of checks, each character could be recorded 
in any one of seven degrees of intensity. This enabled 
the record sheet to be shortened to a minimum and 
still to retain an accurate account of the variety. From 
these cards, then, a correct description could be read 
directly. In as many instances as possible, characters 
were measured. This enabled the note taker at the 
conclusion of the trials to determine the range, select 
the classes, and include the types involved. Plant 
characters, with the exception of tassel and mature ear 
and kernel data, were recorded when the ears had 
attained the full milk stage. Ears were harvested from 
the center row if possible and taken to the laboratory 
before being described. In the fall, all remaining ears 
were harvested, husked, and six individuals selected to 
be brought in for mature ear and kernel notations. 

The use of comparison records was found to be 
very helpful, especially in determining synonym pos- 
sibilities. Ordinary large size composition books, in 
which were listed all varieties, were used from time to 
time throughout the season. Brief and outstanding 
observations concerning the similarities or differences 
of the varieties were noted in the field. Due to con- 
venient cold storage facilities, ears in the milk stage of 
practically all varieties could be held and observed and 
comparisons noted at the same time. Later in the 
winter the mature ears were brought together, observa- 
tions recorded, and comparisons made of this stage. 
The combination of all three stages on which comparison 
notes were taken offered exceedingly valuable clues in 
establishing synonyms or type relationship. 

The choosing of a correct name to use for each 
variety has been given careful consideration. Whenever 
possible the principles applied in Standardized Plant 
Names have been observed; but inasmuch as names 
of varieties of vegetables are not listed in that work, 
it has been necessary for the authors to decide on the 
names without recourse to a standard guide. Where 
the recorded data have shewn reasonably sure evidence 
of " identity " between two or more varieties, the 
authors have tried to preserve the name which seemed 
to offer the strongest case for its maintenance and 
have listed the others as synonyms. 

Very often selections of a given variety differ only 
in minor respects. This condition has made it necessary 
to discuss many named forms in a comparative manner 
and not as distinct varieties. It is in this connection 



that our judgment will be subject to argument and 
further trials will be necessary to settle the contended 
points. 

The literature relating to the descriptions of varieties 
is, for the most part, of doubtful value and rather frag- 
mentary in distribution. No monograph has been pub- 
lished that approaches the significance of those written 
in connection with certain other vegetable crops. 
Constant recourse has been made to various experiment 
station publications, journals, periodicals, books, and 
seed catalogs. These sources were of particular value 
in tracing the history and origin of varieties as well as 
in serving as an index for establishing a complete list of 
varieties to be used in our trials. When seed of these 
varieties was not available, the list served as a record of 
the progenitors of present-day varieties. 

Since the corn plant is very easily cross fertilized, 
more or less variation exists within a given group or 
variety. Such a condition has made it difficult to 
record definite characters that would be of value in 
attempting a horticultural classification of this crop. 1 
This fact is undoubtedly responsible for the lack of 
practical and reliable keys for sweet corn. The literature 
relating to the classification of sweet corn varieties is 
therefore limited to very general classes which, in 
themselves, offer little help insofar as identification is 
concerned. 

The first classification of sweet corn varieties was 
published in the Transactions of the New York State 
Agricultural Society of 1848. In this account J. H. 
Salisbury arranged in a systematic order the various 
classes cf maize based, first, on the physical and chemical 
characteristics of the dry kernel, and second, on the 
color of the kernel and cob. Only one class was devoted 
to sweet corn under which three varieties were discussed 
and an additional one of hybrid origin mentioned. The 
classification for sweet corn consisted of the following: 

Class 5. Those the kernels of which are destitute of a farinaceous 
portion, and at maturity shrink or contract, giving a 
shriveled appearance to the epidermis. 

A. Those with white kernels and a white cob. 

(a) Small Early Sweet. 

(b) Large Rhode Island Sweet. 

B. Those with white kernels and a red cob. 
(a) The Hematite Sweet. 

Kornicke in 1873 classified sweet corn grown at 
Poppelsdorf, Germany, in five groups according to 
color of kernel. 

In 1884, Sturtevant published a classification of 
the various types of maize. Three groups or races, as 
they were called, of sweet corn were established. These 
were designated by the first three letters in the alphabet 
and had as a basis for their separation the relative 
resistance of the varieties included to current hybridiza- 
tion as manifested by the color or kernel character type 
produced. Each race was given a synthetic descrip- 
tion which included all varieties possessing in general 
the characteristics of the group. Race A included all 
8-rowed varieties, race B all 12-rowed ones, and race C 
the many-rowed sorts. Such characters as plant size, 



1 The reader is referred to Chapter II for a discussion on the botanical classification of the plant. 



16 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



shank size, ear shape, kernel shape and color, season, 
and natural climatic adaptability were indicated in the 
race description. In addition to the general separa- 
tion according to races, each class was further divided 
into smaller groups based on cob and kernel color. 

In 1886, Sturtevant's basis for race distinction was 
primarily based on kernel shape, namely, broader than 
deep, broad as deep, and deeper than broad. Each 
group was further classified into tribes designated by the 
Roman numerals I, II, and III, which had as their 
distinguishing features various ear conformations, 
namely, cylindrical, tapering, and fusiform. Other 
features of the classification remained the same. 

With slight changes the same method was continued 
in his work published with the United States Depart- 
ment of Agriculture in 1899. At that time the terms 
race and tribe were discontinued and that of sub-groups 
substituted. The divisions of sub-groups had as their 
basis many variations of ear conformation and therefore 
greater opportunity for segregation was made available. 

Burrill and McCluer, working at the Illinois Experi- 
ment Station, made three studies of sweet corn, the 
results of which were published as bulletins of that sta- 
tion. The first two, published in 1888 and 1890, 
respectively, had as the basis of classification the time 
required to reach edible maturity. Three classes, 
viz., early, medium, and late, were established, each 
of which was further segregated according to color of 
dry kernel into yellow, white, or colored other than 
yellow. The last study, which appeared in 1891, was 
identical with the previous ones as to classes with the 
exception of having an additional segregation based on 
the number of rows per ear. All varieties were accord- 
ingly classified as having either eight rows or more than 
eight. 

The most recent classification of sweet corn was 
written by Byron D. Halsted and his associates at the 
New Jersey State Experiment Station in 1904. This 
study was based on the several characteristics of dry 
ears. The varieties were separated into three major 
divisions, namely, " (1) Those with the kernels of the 
common amber white color; (2) those of various other 
colors, and (3) those flint corns which on account of 
their earliness and productiveness are much grown for 
market purposes." The first and largest of these groups 
was segregated into the following classes: Distinctness of 
rows; cob color; number of rows; season; ear size and 
shape; and kernel size, shape, and wrinkling. The 
basis of classification of the other two major divisions, 
which included relatively few varieties, was determined 
according to kernel color and number of rows. This 
treatment of sweet corn classification proved to be the 
most detailed one yet proposed. Its limitations must 
be realized, however, since the work was based on only 
one season's results. No information relative to vegeta- 
tive growth or that of ears in the edible milk stage was 
included. Since all factors should be taken into con- 
sideration for a systematic classification, this crop, at 
its best, is none too stable to be successfully adapted 
to such a study. 



No attempt is made in this publication to develop 
a detailed classification or key for the identification of 
varieties. Since the crop is largely cross fertilized, the 
average in any one plant or ear character over a period 
of years tends to shift slightly. It is also obvious that 
environmental factors, such as soil fertility, heat, 
moisture, and geographical location, have considerable 
influence on such characters as plant height, vigor, 
days to maturity, wrinkling, and ear size. The large 
increase in the number of varieties and selections, as 
well as the newly developed and ever-increasing list 
of hybrid-inbreds and top crosses, have made the pos- 
sibility of developing a specific classification even more 
remote. 

In this study the arrangement of varieties is based 
primarily on color of the edible kernel. The names which 
constitute the list of those to be described or mentioned 
historically are divided into three sections, each presented 
in alphabetical order. The first group includes those 
sweet corns (Zea mays rugosa) possessing white kernels 
in the milk or boiling stage. Although a few varieties 
in this class, such as Black Mexican, Catawba, and 
Red Cory, have kernels that do not remain very long 
in the white stage, they may be considered in this group 
as the kernels are still white when in prime condition 
for consumption. The second group includes those 
varieties having yellow kernels at the milk or boiling 
stage; and the third, those varieties that are not true 
sweet corns (wrinkled seed) but which are well suited 
for growing in certain agricultural regions where they 
are gathered for eating when the kernels are in the milk. 
The latter group includes both white- and yellow- 
kerneled varieties distributed among the flint, dent, and 
flour forms. 

In order to compile material on the histories of 
the varieties, it has been necessary to seek information 
from a large number of individuals. This information 
has been freely forthcoming and has greatly facilitated 
the accumulation of facts concerning the originators 
and introducers of many earlier varieties. Without 
this patient cooperation it is certain that much of the 
material presented here would have remained unearthed. 
The previously named seed organizations, together 
with the following, have cooperated to the fullest extent 
with the authors in furnishing both information and seed 
for trial: D. Landreth Seed Co., Bristol, Pennsylvania; 
W. Atlee Burpee Co., Doy lest own, Pennsylvania; S. D. 
Woodruff & Sons, Orange, Connecticut; J. C. Robinson 
Seed Co., Waterloo, Nebraska; Western Seed and 
Irrigation Co., Fremont, Nebraska; and many others. 
The authors extend sincere thanks to individuals in 
the above-mentioned organizations, to many other 
individuals of the seed trade, and to co-workers at other 
institutions who remain unnamed because of lack of 
space. 

A supplementary list of little known varieties is 
included on page 95. This group consists of varieties 
that were in existence a very short time, reliable records 
of which have not been available. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



17 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Anthesis The period of full development of the floral organs, 

here used specifically to refer to the time when the 

staminate flower is ready to shed pollen. 
Beaked When the crown of the kernel is exceedingly rough 

and jagged so that at one point a projection is 

extended. 
Broad oval. . . . When the side view of the kernel shows it to be 

definitely broader than long. 
Butt The proximal portion of the ear; the end opposite 

the tip. 

Capped When the tip of an ear is completely filled. 

Color Anther colors are given in common color terms 

with the approximate Ridgeway term in parenthesis. 
Complete With reference to the presence of an entire circle of 

whorl brace roots on one or more nodes. 

Compound. . . When the lateral spikelets of the tassel are abun- 
dantly divided. 
Compressed . . . When the rows of kernels at the butt end are com- 
pact and without indication of furrows. 

Conical When the tip of an ear is distinctly cone-shaped. 

Converging . . . When the crown of the kernel assumes a triangular 

shape: not rounded. 
Covered When the node is completely enclosed by the over- 
lapping sheath. 
Crease dented. When the crown of the kernel is marked with a 

deep, narrow angular depression. 
Crowded When distinct pairs of kernel rows are not apparent; 

around cob are uniformly distributed about the cob; ear 

entirely without longitudinal furro%vs or depressions. 
Crown The top or tip of the kernel opposite the point of 

attachment. 
Cylindrical. ... A relative term used to indicate the resemblance in 

shape of a husked ear to a cylinder. 
Dent corn Grain characterized by the presence of chit, with 

corneous matter on the two sides and starchy 

matter extending to the summit. By the drying 

and shrinkage of the starchy matter the summit 

of the kernel is drawn in or together and indented 

in various forms. 
Double cross. . . A hybrid between two single crosses (A X B) X 

(C X D). 
Drooping The position of a plant part when it bends towards 

the ground away from the erect axis. 
Enlarged When the butt end of an ear is distinctly larger 

than the tip. 
Erect The position of a plant part when it is perpendicular 

to the ground. 
Expanded When the furrows at the base of the ear are much 

wider than at the tip. 
Exposed When the tip of an ear shows an unfilled portion of 

the cob. 
Feathery With reference to a very slender, frail, feather-like 

tassel. 
Flint corn Grain characterized by the presence of corneous 

(flinty) material entirely surrounding the chit and 

starchy matter. 
Furrows The space between two rows or two pairs of rows 

of kernels. 
Horizontal ... The position of a plant part when it is at right 

angles to the erect axis. 
Husk leaves. . . The distal portion of the outside husks, usually 

darker green in color. 
Husks long .... When the husks extend well over the tip of the ear. 
Husks short . . . When the husks scarcely extend over the tip of the 

ear. 
Hybrid A general term used in plant breeding to designate 

a cross between two distinct varieties or two strains 

of the same variety. 



Inbred A strain which has been self-pollinated. This 

makes possible the isolation of homozygous (pure) 

lines or forms i strains ) which may be used as founda- 
tion stocks for the production by hybridization of 

improved varieties of maize. 

Irregular When kernels are out of line with the rows. 

Lost When there are more rows of kernels at the base of 

the ear than at the tip. 

Margin The edge of the leaf. 

Nubbin A small, often poorly developed ear. 

Pairs distinct . . When a series of two rows of kernels do not fuse 

but each pair remains close together. 
Pitted When the surface of the crown of the kernel is 

abundantly covered with very shallow, minute 

depressions. 
Prominent A condition under which the sheath fails to cover 

node the node. 

Rectangular . . . When the shape of the kernel is similar to a 

rectangle. 
Ridged With reference to a series of elevations, long in 

proportion to their width, present on any side of the 

dry kernels other than the crown surface. 
Ring The annular band at the base of each bract, not 

present in all varieties. 
Shank That portion of the ear that serves as a link between 

the cob and the plant; the ear stalk. 
Simple When the lateral spikelets of a tassel are single 

and without sub-branches. 
Single cross. ... A hybrid between two inbred strains A X B, an 

inbred X inbred. 
Smooth When crown of the kernel is free from wrinkling or 

other irregularities. 
Smooth dented. When the crown of the kernel is marked with a 

depression free from wrinkling. 
Soft corn Grain characterized by the presence of chit and 

starchy matter, the corneous material being absent. 
Sweet corn .... Grain characterized by the presence of chit and 

corneous matter, the latter translucent and wrinkled. 
Tapering A term indicating a husked ear larger in diameter 

in the butt section than in the tip section. 
Tip The distal portion of the ear; the point opposite 

the butt ; the apex. 
Top cross A variety (commercial) crossed with one inbred, 

variety X inbred. 
Triangular .... When the shape of the kernel is similar to a triangle. 
Twisted When the rows of kernels spiral from the butt to 

the tip. 
Wrinkled The presence of more or less coarse or finely divided 

corrugations on the surface of the crown of the 

kernel. 
Zigzag With reference to the stalk; when the internodes 

bend alternately. 

THE WHITE-KERNELED VARIETIES OF SWEET CORN 

White-kerneled varieties of sweet corn represent 
not only the largest group but also the sorts first estab- 
lished and used as the basis for the many selections and 
crosses which have followed. Starting in 1779 with the 
name Papoon and Indian corn, during the next 50 years 
the list by Salisbury included 4 in 1848, 16 varieties 
described by Burr in 1863, and 33 by Sturtevant in 
1884. For this study a total of 956 names of white 
varieties was found. It has been possible to investi- 
gate the great majority of these but after much research 
only the meagerest of information has been forthcoming 
for some of them. 

The list of varieties expanded rather rapidly; at 
least to those growers who were the cultivators during 
the period of 1848 to 1933 and of course most rapidly 



18 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



since the publication of Sturtevant's list in 1884. A 
writer in the American Agriculturist of 1864 was lead 
to say: "Sweet corn has run into a number of varieties, 
distinguished by their time of maturity, size of ear, and 
comparative sweetness." Nearly 30 years later, 1892, 
another commentator wrote, " the list of sweet corns is 
getting to be of wearisome length, but I do not see that 
any real improvement is being made." What would 
these individuals have written had they had the present 
list at their command? 

The evolution of American varieties of sweet corn, 
which up to 1900 consisted almost entirely of white 
kerneled sorts, has several distinct eras, largely based 
on popular opinion as to the most desirable sorts. The 
first varieties of which we have any record were small 
in plant and ear, the latter usually being 5 to 7 inches 
long and possessing 8 to 10 rows of kernels. Up to 
about 1890 earliness of season, usually associated with 
dwarfness of plant, was the major consideration that 
led to the success of a variety. Although a few large 
eared sorts were in existence at this time, recombina- 
tions from many crosses resulted in the production of 
almost every conceivable combination of number of 
rows, length and diameter of ear, color of cob and kernel, 
and size and shape of kernel. Such a mixture induced 
interested growers towards the selection of larger ears, 
which at the same time retained the desirable character 
of earliness. This was followed, and subsequently 
continued to the present time by the development of 
superior quality among varieties. With the introduc- 
tion of Golden Bantam, the attributes of quality con- 
sisted of the additional factor of attractive color in the 
edible stage, as measured by consumer preference, as 
well as such characters as sweetness, flavor and tender- 
ness of pericarp. 

The justification for so divergent a collection of 
modern sweet corn varieties is presumably based on 
several factors. One of these is the localized market 
preference for certain varieties. New York City has 
long been partial to a very large ear, consequently such 
varieties as Stowell's Evergreen, Long Island Beauty 
and Late Mammoth are most popular in that as well 
as in other large eastern cities. The prevalence of the 
corn ear worm in certain sections has limited the number 
of varieties profitably grown to those that offer greatest 
morphological resistance to insect attack. Consequently 
such varieties as Oregon Evergreen and Alameda Sweet 
that have comparatively tight fitting husks at the tip, 
are retained in southwestern United States as most 
valuable for this purpose. The more northern areas 
of the United States must necessarily, because of short- 
ness of season, confine the varieties to the extreme early 
ones. Such conditions, then, warrant the existence of 
Alpha, Dighton, Pickaninny, Early Dow, Aroostock 
Early and others. Similarly many varieties are brought 
into existence and continued because of their superior 
quality, even though certain other of their character- 
istics as size of plant, color of ear, etc., may not be 
exceptional. Likeness in one or more characters to an 
old time favorite, or the apparent resistance to certain 



diseases and drought account for the existence of other 

varieties. 

Abbott & Cobb's Early. Refs. 2, 345. 

Abbott & Cobb of Philadelphia introduced this sweet 
corn in 1927. It was first discovered in Bucks County at 
their Pennypack Valley trial grounds growing in a field of 
Kendel's Early Giant. Subsequent trials showed its 
uniformity and remarkable adaptability to the growing 
conditions of that famous Philadelphia market gardeners' 
section. The Philadelphia region prefers a white corn 
of fair size, as will be noted in looking at the names of 
varieties listed by this company. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 92 days, 
12 days later than Mammoth White Cory, in season 
with Metropolitan and Early Evergreen, and 2 days 
earlier than Delicious. The plants are 1-1 J _. feet 
shorter than those of Metropolitan, less inclined to 
tiller but have equally as long tassels. The husked 
ears are 1-2 inches shorter, less plump, but contain 2-4 
more rows of somewhat mere narrow kernels. 

Flant medium tall, 5-5 '-j feet; nodes 8-9, covered to slightly 
exposed; tillers few to none; tassel moderately long and rather 
coarse, 18-20 inches; lateral spikelets moderately many and crowded. 
Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, 1 and occasionally 2 ears per stalk. 
Husk leaves very few, short and light. Husked ear medium long, 
medium plump, 7-8 x l? 4 -l 7 s inches; rows 12-14; kernels white; 
medium size; in dry stage as broad as long, nearly square. 

Abolition. Ref. 217. 

The catalog of James J. H. Gregory, Marblehead, 
Massachusetts, in the year 1885 briefly mentions this 
variety of good size, reputed to be sweet and tender, and 
suggests that it originated many years previous by cross- 
ing the Mexican with some standard white variety. 

Acme. Refs. 22, 235, 238, 367, 368, 533, 535. Syns. 
De Wolf's Early Acme, Early Acme. 
The Gurney Seed & Nursery Company of Yankton, 
South Dakota, found this new sort growing in the garden 
of M. J. De Wolf and introduced it in 1922 the year that 
kindly old gentleman celebrated his eightieth birthday. 
It is a heavy producer and is a rival of many varieties of 
field corn in this respect. A long ear of 12-14 rows is 
ready only a few days later in season than Golden 
Bantam. It has been continued by the Gurney Com- 
pany as a valuable new creation of sweet corn and 
apparently has many friends in the northern plains region. 

Alameda Sweet. Refs. 376, 380, 381. Syns. Alameda, 
Early Alameda, Early Improved Dwarf Alameda. 

An early catalog of C. C. Morse & Co. 1907) 
of San Francisco listed this variety as Early Mam- 
moth or Alameda. Ey some the name Early Mam- 
moth is still carried, although present stocks are 
available which produce ears indicating a definite 
separation between the two. The actual originator of 
Alameda is not known, but its use in Alameda County, 
California, has been very general for many years. 
Market gardeners are believed to have developed the 
variety by selection from Early Mammoth, a deviation 
of the older Asylum corn. 

There have been several improved lines developed 
by growers and seedsmen in California. The present 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



19 



dwarf strain was cataloged first in 1924 and was the 
result of some selection work begun in 1920 by C. C. 
Morse & Co. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 87 days, 
which was about 10 days earlier than Early Mammoth 
and Stowell's Evergreen, about the same season as 
Howling Mob, and 3 days later than Kendel's Early 
Giant. The plants of Alameda were 2-2 J j feet shorter 
than Eariy Mammoth, tassels shorter and more coarse, 
and ears 2-3 inches shorter with kernels more narrow 
and decidedly more crowded on the cob. 

This variety has assumed greatest importance in 
California where it has been found by market gardeners 
to be cne cf the most adaptable to those climatic con- 
ditions. The tight wrapping cf the husks about the 
tip is an important factor with corn growers in that 
area inasmuch as such protection reduces to some extent 
corn earworm injury. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 ' _. feet ; stalks medium heavy and 
slightly zigzag. Nodes 9-10, moderately covered to slightly exposed, 
not very prominent. Brace roots present, medium heavy, whorl 
complete and useful on one node. Tillers few, much shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves very long and moderately broad, 36-38 x 
4— t 1 j inches; sheath equal to and occasionally slightly shorter than 
internode. Tassel moderately short and heavy, 15-16 inches, 
coarse, streaked with dark red at the base; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, medium long, 
many, crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped with pale red; anthers 
variable in color; 66-68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, otherwise one nubbin present. Shank short and 
decidedly heavy, 2-4 inches. Husks many, heavy, short, tightly 
wrapped and rather difficult to remove. Silk red, long and abun- 
dant. Husked ear moderately long and plump, 8-9 x 1 " y-2 1 _ l inches, 
moderately tapering; base enlarged and usually compressed, occasion- 
ally somewhat open; tip abruptly conical and slightly exposed; 
rows 12-16, moderately straight, occasionally somewhat twisted 
at the base. Furrows occasionally present at base, deep and narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately narrow and deep; 
at dry stage dull white, longer than wide, moderately thin, 1.05 x .90 
x .35 cm. (168 seeds per oz.); triangular; crown slightly rounded, 
surface rather abundantly and deeply wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Albany. Refs. 22, 89, 91, 93, 238, 367, 368, 397, 405, 

487, 508, 533, 535. Syns. Albany Sugar, Breck 

Premier. 

This is another sort which served as a useful variety 

for a very limited period. It was listed about 1885 

by Henry A. Dreer, Philadelphia, as belonging to 

the group of early varieties having more than eight 

rows. It apparently was very similar to Shakers 

Early, Perry's Hybrid, and Squantum. After 1892 

the name no longer appeared in catalogs. 

Plant medium tall, 5-6 feet; stalks moderately heavy; foliage 
abundant, dark green; tassel stiff; tillers many. Ears borne 24-30 
inches from the ground; husk leaves moderately large, husked 
ears medium long and moderately plump, 7-8 x 1 \/g- 2 inches, moder- 
ately tapering, abruptly conical at the tip; rows 10—12, usually 
regular, crowded around the cob. Kernels at milk stage white, 
broad, shallow; at dry stage amber white, nearly as deep as broad, 
distinctly thick, nearly square; crown very slightly rounded; surface 
somewhat wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Alpha. Refs. 335, 345, 348, 478. 

Alpha was introduced in 1922 by D. M. Ferry & Co. 
of Detroit. For many years Ferry had been searching 
for a variety which would produce ears of fair size and 



good quality and yet be earlier in season than Mammoth 
White Cory. After trying many crosses and selections 
at the Ferry experimental garden at Oakview, Michigan, 
a very promising stock was secured from W. B. Perry, a 
wellknown corn seed grower of Cresco, Iowa. This origi- 
nated from a cross between Peep-O-Day and Extra 
Early Iowa. The new corn was the earliest in the trial 
grounds and was given the name Alpha, the first letter 
of the Greek alphabet, to suggest the first or beginning 
of anything. 

Edible ears were produced in 75 days, about 2 weeks 
earlier than White Cory and 5 days later than Early 
Market. The plants are much like those of Early Dow 
and Aroostock Early, although slightly more slender. 
The ears are about the same length but slightly less 
strongly tapered. Its value is attributed to its earliness 
and as such is used to some extent by market gardeners 
and home garden enthusiasts in those areas where white 
corn is acceptable. 

Plant short, 3?.j-4 feet; stalks zigzag, and slender; nodes 6-8, 
prominent. Brace roots absent. Tillers usually absent, occasion- 
ally few, much shorter than central stalk. Leaves short and narrow, 
24—26 x 2)2~3 inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassel 
moderately short and slender, 14—16 inches, occasionally dark red 
at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, few, 
short and rather scattered; bracts green, sparsely striped with light 
red; anthers buff colored (deep colonial buff to chamois); 52-55 days 
to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one ear per stalk with a 
nubbin usually present. Husk leaves few, short and very light. 
Husks few, rather thin, short and easily removed. Silk scanty 
and short. Husked ear moderately short and moderately slender, 
6—7 x 1H-1% inches, somewhat cylindrical and slightly tapering; 
rows 8, rather noticeably paired, straight, inclined to be slightly 
irregular at the base; furrows deep and narrow; base slightly enlarged, 
open; tip conical and exposed. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, moderately wide and 
medium depth; at dry stage dull white, medium size, .91 x 1.1 x 
.38 cm. (108 seeds per oz.); short oval in shape; crown slightly 
rounded; surface sparsely and rather coarsely wrinkled; set tightly 
on cob. 

Amber Cream. Refs. 22, 61, 73, 74, 89, 91, 94, 214, 

397, 411, 431, 446, 503, 507, 508, 510, 532, 533, 

535, 536, 537. Syn. Amber Cream Sweet. 

This good old sweet corn introduced in 1881 by W. 

Atlee Burpee & Co., Philadelphia, was a leading sort for 

25 years. It was said to have come from a cross between 

Moore's Early Concord, a variety known since 1865, and 

Brigg's Early, one of the red cob Narragansett group. 

Crosses reported to have been made during this time were 

probably accidental, and the exact parentage was difficult 

to fix. J. A. Wilson, writing for the Rural New-Yorker 

in 1893 considered the variety as " very rich and sweet " 

and a " good late sort." After 1904 the name was 

dropped by Burpee. 

Plant tall, 6-7 feet; stalk stout and vigorous. Tassel long 
and slender, lateral spikelets many, drooping, crowded. Ears 
borne 20-24 inches from the ground; husked ear medium long and 
moderately slender, 7-8 x 1 ' j- 1 5 s inches, nearly cylindrical to 
slightly tapering: base compressed, tip conical and exposed; rows 
10-12, usually crowded, moderately straight, irregular at the base. 
Kernels at milk stage creamy white, at dry stage reddish to flesh 
color, rather small, as long as broad (155 seeds per oz.); blunt, 
triangular; crown slightly rounded; surface abundantly wrinkled 



20 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Aristocrat. Refs. 140, 238, 335, 345, 403, 460. Syn. 
Extra Early Aristocrat. 

Aristocrat is a variation of Red Cob Cory from which 
it was selected. For many years the variety was con- 
trolled by the originator who supplied vegetables to the 
" aristocrats " and summer folk of Newport, Rhode 
Island. He was careful not to allow seed to get into the 
hands of his competitors. Thus, in having a monopoly 
on what was reputed to be the finest sweet corn that came 
to the market, he found no difficulty in disposing of all he 
raised. 

After a few years the variety " escaped from bond- 
age " and thereafter became more widely grown. Henry 
C. Anthony, a grower at Newport, grew seed for Henry 
A. Dreer of Philadelphia who offered seed to his cus- 
tomers in 1903, after he had attempted to develop the 
variety with a white cob. This was never quite accom- 
plished, for Aristocrat is known today as a very desirable 
midseason pink cob variety. Early descriptions called 
attention to the " grains extremely sweet and sugary; 
being decidedly broad, to allow of easy scoring with a 
knife preparatory to buttering when eating from the 
cob." 

Eighty-eight days were required for this variety 
to produce edible ears. This was 3 days later than Red 
Cory, one week later than Nuetta, about the same season 
as Howling Mob and 10 days earlier than Stowell's 
Evergreen. Considerable variation exists at the present 
time in plant and ear characters, but in general the 
plants are slightly taller and more stout than those of 
Red Cory, while the ears are plumper and possess greater 
variation in kernel color at the dry stage. 

Plant medium tall, 5 J £-5j^ feet; stalks moderately slender and 
slightly zigzag; nodes 8-10, slightly exposed, moderately prominent. 
Tillers moderately many, usually much shorter than central stalk. 
Leaves medium long and medium breadth, 30-32 x 4—4}i inches; 
sheath equal to and occasionally shorter than internode. Tassel 
moderately long and slender, 18-20 inches, occasionally streaked 
with red at the base; terminal spike erect, lateral spikelets moderately 
drooping, moderately many, medium long and rather crowded; 
bracts green, heavily striped with dark red; anthers variable in 
color; 62-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at the 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally 
two ears per stalk. Husks moderately many, rather short and 
tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and medium plump, 
7-8 x 1 J o — 1? 4 inches, partly cylindrical, moderately tapering; base 
expanded and somewhat open; tip long conical and slightly exposed; 
rows 8-10, moderately regular, occasionally paired, not crowded 
around the cob; furrows deep and wide on 8-row ears. 

Kernels at milk stage creamy white, 8-row ears possess much 
wider kernels than 10-row ones, shallow; at dry stage variable in 
color from russet brown (burnt sienna) with part of the crown much 
lighter (honey yellow), to all i honey yellow); broader than long, 
.98 x 1.12 x .44 cm. (110 seeds per oz.); broad oval in shape; crown 
distinctly rounded; surface very sparsely and shallowly wrinkled; 
set very tightly on red cob. 

Aroostock Early. Ref. 145. 

Named for Aroostock County, Maine, by James A. 
Dunning of R. B. Dunning & Co., Bangor. This variety 
is popular in that state because of its earliness. The early 
history of the variety is unknown. Mr. Dunning had 
secured seed from a grower who had carefully selected 
and thoroughly acclimated it to that section with its short 



growing season. It belongs in the group of early 
varieties with short slender ears and rather short stalk. 
Edible maturity was obtained at Geneva in 70 days, 
5 days earlier than Alpha, in season with Early Market 
and 3 days later than Pickaninny. The plants are 
much the same as those of Alpha and Early Dow, 
possibly somewhat taller than the former. The ears 
often have 10 rows instead of uniformly 8, as in Alpha, 
but otherwise are much alike. Because of its earliness 
it is used in the mere northern areas, particularly in 
Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont, where the 
number of acceptable varieties is limited. 

Plant moderately short, 4}£-4% feet; stalks slender, usually 
straight, some slightly zigzag; nodes 7-8, usually covered, not 
prominent. Brace roots not present. Tillers few, much shorter 
than central stalk. Leaves short and narrow, 24-26 x 2?4~3 inches; 
sheath usually equal to but occasionally shorter than internode. 
Tassel medium long and slender, 15-18 inches, occasionally streaked 
with red at the base; terminal spike erect, lateral spikelets nearly 
erect, moderately few, medium long; bracts green, moderately 
striped with red; anthers variable in color; 50-52 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk, with 
nubbin present; husks medium in number, rather thick, easily 
removed. Husked ear moderately short and moderately slender, 
6-7 x lj^-l?^ inches; moderately tapering; base expanded; tip 
conical and exposed; rows 8-10, paired in 8-rowed ears, not so 
evident in 10-rowed ones, straight, not crowded around cob; fur- 
rows often pronounced, deep and wide. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, broad and shallow; 
at dry stage dull white, distinctly broader than long, and medium 
thick, .92 x 1.32 x .47 cm. (96 seeds per oz.); short broad oval in 
shape; crown rounded; surface shallowly and rather sparsely 
wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Asylum. Refs. 13, 14, 22, 73, 74, 89, 91, 238, 255, 397, 
404, 405, 431, 435, 503, 507, 508, 515, 535, 536, 
537, 538. Syns. Asylum Sugar, Old Asylum, 
Rhode Island Asylum. 

Asylum as a variety name goes back to that 
group of sweet corns introduced during the early 
sixties. According to the American Agriculturist of 
1864 it was first sent out by the Dexter Asylum at 
Providence, Rhode Island. The exact date cannot 
be fixed but since Burr in his " Field and Garden Vege- 
tables of America," published in 1863, did not mention 
the variety, it probably was little known previous to 
that time. In the book on gardening written by Peter 
Henderson in 1867, four varieties of sweet corn were 
mentioned: Early Darling, Dwarf Prolific Sugar, Stowell's 
Evergreen and Asylum, the last said to possess every 
desirable quality except earliness. 

The early history of many of these varieties can 
never be known. Salisbury in 1848 describes a large 
Rhode Island Sweet with 8-rowed ears. Between this 
period and 1863 Twelve-rowed Sweet, Old Colony and 
Stowell's Evergreen appeared. Undoubtedly there were 
other stocks grown privately that had not yet been 
brought to popular notice. Asylum and later similar 
varieties must have arisen either as selections from one 
of these named sorts, from an Indian source, or as the 
result of a cross of a known sweet corn with some field 
variety. 

Credit for the introduction of this variety must go 
to J. M. Thorburn 8b Co., for in 1864 Orange Judd, 




I 





T 



BEARSFOOT 



(Three-quarters natural size) 




BEST OF ALL 



(Three-quarters natural size) 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



21 



editor of the American Agriculturist, mentions Asylum 
in a short article on Indian corn varieties, and says, 
" The great privilege of testing the merits of the variety 
came because it was included among 15 tolerably well- 
known sorts laid on my table by the J. M. Thorburn 
Co." For 40 years after its introduction this variety 
remained a leading sort. In 1898 F. Wm. Rane of 
New Hampshire selected Asylum, Hances Early and 
Squantum from a test of 41 varieties as those having 
extra sweetness. During this period there were many 
selections introduced and many new sorts named that 
differed but little from the general type represented by 
Asylum. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7 feet; stalks heavy, with intemodes 
long: leaves long and broad. Tassels long, lateral spikelets many, 
drooping, crowded. Tillers few. Ears borne rather high, 30-35 
inches from the ground. Husked ear moderately long and moder- 
ately plump, 8-9 x l?4-2 inches, moderately tapering; base com- 
pressed, tip abruptly conical to rounded; rows 12, moderately 
straight and regular, not crowded around the cob, furrows deep 
and narrow. Kernels at milk stage white; at dry stage whitish 
amber, moderately large (121 seeds per oz.\ about as long as broad, 
triangular, blunt at the base; crown rounded to nearly semi-circular: 
surface abundantly wrinkled; set rather loosely on cob. 
Avon Evergreen. Refs. 129, 175. 

This variety was named and introduced by D. M. 
Ferry 8b Co. of Detroit in 1913 and is of their own breed- 
ing, being a cross between Stowell's Evergreen and Late 
Mammoth. From the year of its introduction until 1922 
it was featured by Ferry and also by W. E. Dallwig of 
Milwaukee as superior to Stowell's. The ear was cylin- 
drical, about 9 inches long with 14 to 16 rows. As com- 
pared to Stowell's it was perhaps a trifle earlier with 
longer ear and thicker kernel. 
Banana Cream. Refs. 147, 553, 555. 

Seed of the variety Banana Cream was obtained by 
Oscar H. Will from a Mr. Harris, gardener of the H. Hollis 
Hunnewell estate at Wellesley, Massachusetts. As grown 
in North Dakota it was a rather late variety but was far 
better than others then grown and was, accordingly, 
introduced in 1897. Mr. George Will, who has watched 
its progress for 35 years, says, " It has undoubtedly 
changed considerably in earliness from being grown here 
in North Dakota for the past 35 years or more, but in 
general is about the same." 

Eighty-six days were required for ears to reach 
edible maturity at Geneva. This was 2 days later than 
Kendel's Early Giant and 2 days earlier than Howling 
Mob. The plants are 1-1 l ■> feet taller than those of 
Howling Mob and decidedly more inclined to tiller, 
giving the plants a much more bushy appearance. The 
ears are 1-2 inches shorter, more slender, and dis- 
tinctly more tapering, whereas the kernels are longer 
and thinner. It is one of the lesser known sorts and is 
very largely confined to the Northern Plains area where 
it has been reputed to remain in the edible state longer 
than most varieties. It produced very attractive ears at 
Geneva with kernels very uniformly arranged, thereby 
suggesting its usefulness in sweet corn breeding work. 

Plant medium tall, 5J^-5H teet; stalks moderately slender 
and straight; nodes 8-9, prominent, exposed; internodes occasionally 
streaked with red on exposed portions. Brace roots present, 



slender and not very useful. Tillers many, giving plant a very 
bushy appearance, equal in height to central stalk. Leaves short 
arid moderately narrow, 23-25 x 3-3 'j inches, midrib very broad 
and prominent, sheath equal to and shorter than internode. Tassel 
medium long and slender, 15-18 inches; terminal spike erect, 
lateral spikelets nearly horizontal, moderately few, short, scattered 
and occasionally branched at the base; bracts dark green, rather 
heavily striped with dark red; anthers reddish bronze (terra cotta 
and van dyke red); 60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin; shank moderately short and 
slender, 3—4 inches. Husk leaves many, long, heavy and much 
darker than husks; husks short, rather light and tightly wrapped. 
Husked ear medium long and moderately slender, 7-8 x 1 ' i 1 . 
inches, decidedly tapering; base slightly enlarged and compressed, 
tip long conical and exposed; rows 12-14, straight, regular, very 
attractive, crowded around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white; at dry stage dull opalescent white, 
small, narrow, much longer than wide, noticeably thin, 1.0 x .81 x 
.31 cm. (172 seeds per oz.l; distinctly triangular in shape: crown 
slightly rounded; surface very rough, rather coarsely and abundantly 
wrinkled, often deeply creased in parts; set moderately tight on 
cob. 

Baltimore Market. Refs. 370, 403, 533. 

Price 8s Drinkard describe this variety as a good mid- 
season corn of the coarse-grained sort. It was introduced 
in 1907 by Moore and Simon, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
as the result of a cross between Southern Tuscarora and 
Roslyn Hybrid. This would account for its coarse- 
ness and poor quality. The vigorous growth of the 
plant and productive bearing habit made the variety 
a great favorite with Baltimore growers. 

Bearsfoot. Refs. 22, 55, 75, 152, 181, 423, 435, 464, 
507, 515, 533. Syns. Concord Bears-Foot, Rhode 
Island, Rhode Island Bearsfoot, Washington Bears- 
foot, " Washington," " Washington Market." 
Illus. 20. 
A favorite in the Boston market this was known 
for many years as Concord Bears-Foot. The name 
Washington or Washington Market sometimes appeared 
as a synonym of Bearsfoot but this name was not 
correctly used since it appeared more often in connec- 
tion with Egyptian. The first listing of Bearsfoot 
was in the 1906 catalog of W. W. Rawson 8b Co., 
Boston. It was also listed by Joseph Breck 8b Co. 
and by W. E. Barrett Co., Providence, Rhode Island. 
The latter company offered the variety in 1933. 

It was a popular sort in New England, somewhat 
on the order of Zig Zag Evergreen, with a smaller ear and 
less tendency to zig zag; the ear is broad or bear-footed 
on the end, and filled with fairly narrow deep grains of 
good quality. 

Belle Isle. Ref. 286. Syn. New Belle Isle. 

This variety is described in the catalog of S. M. Isbell 
8b Co., Jackson, Michigan, as earlier than Peep O'Day 
but with larger ears produced higher up on the stalk. 
Isbell listed the variety in 1925 for the last time. 

Best of All. Refs. 74, 116, 207, 208, 241, 278, 368, 404, 
405, 454, 515, 533, 573. Syns. Silver Queen, 
White Bantam. Illus. 21. 
This sweet corn has been known as Buckbee's 

Best of All since its introduction in 1894 by H. W. 



22 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Buckbee Co. of Rockford, Illinois. It is now 40 years 
old but the house of Buckbee continues to find it a 
leader among its customers. 

Ninety-six days were required for ears to reach 
edible maturity at Geneva. This was 9 days later 
than Early Sweet and Crosby and 2 days earlier than 
Stowell's Evergreen. The plants are slightly shorter 
than those of Early Sweet and have a consistently 
greater tendency to tiller. The tassels are very much 
alike, both having much longer, more slender and 
feathery laterals than any other variety. The ears 
are similar to each other, but much longer and less 
tapering than Alpha. 

Plant medium tall, 5J^-6J^ feet; stalks moderately heavy 
and straight; nodes 9-10, covered, not prominent. Brace roots 
absent. Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves 
medium long and medium broad, 30-32 x S 1 ;.^ inches; sheath 
longer than internode. Tassel medium long, slender and rather 
feathery, 15-18 inches; terminal spike erect to slightly drooping; 
lateral spikelets decidedly drooping, many, long, crowded and 
multi-branched; bracts and anthers variable in color; 70-72 days 
to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank long and slender, 
4-6 inches, often longer. Husk leaves many, long and heavy. 
Husks medium in number, moderately long, rather loosely wrapped 
and easily removed. Husked ear moderately long and slender, 
8-9 x l'j-l-\ inches, slightly tapering; base expanded and open; 
tip conical, slightly exposed and occasionally capped; rows 8, 
distinctly paired, moderately straight, slightly irregular at the base, 
not crowded around the cob; furrows deep and medium wide. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, broad and shallow; 
at dry stage, amber white, moderately small, wider than long and 
thin, .9 x 1.12 x .37 cm. (116 seeds per oz.); short oval in shape; 
crown rounded; surface very shallowly and sparsely wrinkled, often 
nearly smooth; set tightly on cob. 

Big Four. Ref. 374. Syn. Wilkes Big Four. 

Big Four sweet corn was sold on the local market in 
Los Angeles by Sam Wilkes for several years prior to 
its introduction in 1914 by the Morris & Snow Seed 
Co. of that city. According to catalog descriptions it 
was a vigorous grower 4 to 7 days later than Oregon 
Evergreen, ears larger than those of that variety and 
with tightly fitting husks. The last listing of the 
variety was found in 1927. 

Black Mexican. Refs. 14, 17, 22, 61, 73, 74, 87, 89, 

90, 91, 93, 94, 121, 214, 217, 238, 240, 241, 309, 

328, 329, 335, 350, 367, 368, 388, 392, 397, 403, 

407, 408, 411, 412, 414, 422, 423, 429, 435, 442, 

487, 503, 507, 508, 511, 512, 513, 525, 533, 535, 

536, 537, 538, 544. Syns. Black Mexican Sweet, 

Black Sugar, Black Sweet, Black Sweet Corn, 

Early Mexican Sweet, Extra Early Black Mexican, 

Improved Black Mexican, Mexican, Mexican 

Black Sugar, Mexican Sweet. Illus. 24, 25. 

It has been said that " no farm in America fulfills its 

mission without a field of corn and no Yankee could feel at 

home without an ear of sweet corn if he had ever lived in 

the country." Likewise the epicurean of vegetable morsels 

may not rest in his search for the acme of all sweet corn 

until he has eaten Black Mexican fresh from the field. The 

Hon. J. J. H. Gregory said of this variety in 1875, " it is 



the sweetest and tenderest for table use of all varieties I 
am acquainted with." It is true that the ear is black at 
full maturity and while it may not look so well upon the 
table as the white or yellow kinds, after tasting it one 
forgets all prejudices against color and takes another 
ear. 

The name Black Mexican implies that it came from 
Mexico; it is not mentioned by Salisbury in 1848, by 
Bement in 1853, or by Klippart in 1858. Under the 
name Black Sweet it was described by Burr in 1863. 
James J. H. Gregory of Marblehead, Massachusetts, 
listed this in 1863 in his retail catalog of garden vegetables 
under the name Mexican Sweet. A special circular 
describing the new introduction was sent out but we 
have been unable to locate a copy. The several lists 
of Indian corns have been inspected but no mention of 
a black sweet corn has been observed. There are, 
however, numerous varieties of flour and dent corns 
which are listed as blue, black or purple. A statement 
from the " Iroquois Uses of Maize and Other Plants " 
by Parker says, " . . the Indians had just left 

their kettles on the fire boiling fine corn and beans 
which we got, but what was most remarkable — the 
corn was all purple . . ." 

Sturtevant in describing 33 varieties of sweet corn 
in 1884 listed both Black Mexican and Black Sugar, 
saying " there is no distinction in the catalogs of seeds- 
men, they are usually grown together, the seeds from 
the same source yielding both varieties, which can be 
readily separated." Throughout the period when sweet 
corns have increased from a mere handful to a thousand 
and more names there have been but few black varieties 
noted, the variety under discussion, Pickaninny and 
Peters Black, a black variety grown in Nova Scotia. 
George F. Will, who has studied the Indian types so 
thoroughly, in a letter to the authors, says, " As regards 
Black Sweet corn, I have found that this is very readily 
produced when either natural or intentional crosses occur 
between the black or very dark blue flint or flour corn 
varieties and any of the sweet corn varieties." There 
was and probably is a black variety of sweet corn some- 
where in the Indian settlements of the southwest, which 
was the progenitor of Black Mexican. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 86 days, 
18-20 days later than Pickaninny, the only other black 
sweet corn variety of importance, in season with Crosby 
and 2 days earlier than White Cory. The plants are 
decidedly taller and much lighter green in color than 
those of Pickaninny, whereas the tassels and anthers 
are similar in color. The pale green foliage and cor- 
respondingly light green tassels serve to distinguish it 
from most varieties on the basis of plants. The ears 
are one-third to one-half again as long as those of 
Pickaninny and are somewhat more tapering. The 
kernels are also longer and broader. 

Black Mexican has long had the reputation of 

being the sweetest and most tender variety that could be 

grown. If it were not for the sudden change in color 

of the young kernels to various shades of purple and 

| bluish black, this sort would undoubtedly be used much 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



23 



more extensively than it is at present. Home gardeners 
must watch carefully the development of the kernels, 
since they are ready for cooking several days before 
they show color and remain sweet and tender for several 
days afterwards. It has created considerable popu- 
larity in the home garden where its high quality has 
been appreciated. Certain geneticists have used it 
in order to increase the quality of various sweet corn 
hybrids in their breeding projects. 

Plant medium tall, 5 1 4 -5 3 4 feet: stalks moderately slender 
and straight: nodes 10-12, covered, not prominent. Brace roots 
occasionally present, slender, not very useful. Tillers few, about 
1 _• as tall as central stalk. Leaves medium long and moderately 
narTow, 28-32 x 3 1 4 -3'_. inches: decidedly pale green in color; 
sheath longer than internode. Tassel moderately short and rather 
heavy, 15-16 inches, distinctly pale green in color; terminal spike 
erect : lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, branched, 
many present and crowded; bracts pale whitish green striped with 
slightly darker green; anthers uniformly pale yellow (pinard yellow i; 
64-66 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk. Shank moderately short and slender, 2—4 inches. Husk 
leaves few, very short and light. Husks medium in number and 
length, tightly wrapped, not easily removed. Silk moderately 
long but scanty, uniformly pale green in color. Husked ear medium 
long and moderately slender, 7-8 x ljs-l 5 , inches, partly cylindri- 
cal and slightly tapering: base slightly open; tip conical and slightly 
exposed; rows 8, very often paired, straight, regular; furrows deep 
and narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, very soon changing to bluish 
black in late edible stage; rather large, moderately broad, shallow 
and rather thin; at dry stage dull black, occasionally with a slate- 
gray tinge: broad as long, medium thickness, 1.1 x 1.2 x .40 cm. (76 
seeds per oz.); broad oval in shape; crown rounded, almost semi- 
circular; surface abundantly, finely and rather deeply wrinkled; 
set moderately tight on cob. 

Bonanza. Refs. 22, 90, 91, 220, 290, 328, 367, 368, 508, 

509, 512, 513, 514, 533. Syns. Early Bonanza, 

Extra Early Bonanza, New Bonanza, New Early 

Bonanza, Sweet Bonanza, Sweet Early Bonanza. 

This variety, one of many to be introduced soon 

after 1890. combined size with earliness. Apparently 

it was introduced simultaneously in 1892 by both Johnson 

fit Stokes of Philadelphia and A. W. Livingston's Sons, 

Columbus, Ohio. Its origin is credited to a Philadelphia 

gardener who " astonished " his brother gardeners by 

having such early big corn. Some sources give the 

variety as a synonym of Squantum but no clean cut 

record is available of its early history. 

The dry ears were 12 -rowed, about 6 inches long, 
1?4 inches in diameter and contained abundantly 
wrinkled, long white kernels loosely set on a whitish cob. 

Boston Market. Refs. 90, 91, 122, 218, 240, 508, 533. 
Syns. Boston, " Crosby's Early Sugar," " Crosby 
Extra Early," Early Boston Market. 
This variety was really listed as Crosby's Extra Early 
Sugar, or Boston Market (" Josiah Crosby Strain ") in 
1892 by W. W. Rawson, Boston, Massachusetts. The 
ears of this strain were smaller and less pointed than the 
Early Crosby which later became the permanent repre- 
sentative of this type. Although similar in name, it was 
quite different from Early Boston Market offered and 
described by Gregory in 1890. The latter supposedly | 



came from Crosby but had a much longer or larger ear 
of 10-12 rows and rather coarse kernels. It had quite 
a run for a few years, but had no real merit as a table 
corn. 

Branching. Refs. 85, 345, 348, 534. Syn. Abundance. 

This variety originated with T. C. Kevitt of 
Athenia, New Jersey, who perfected the strain by care- 
ful breeding until it was released to W. Atlee Burpee 
Co. and introduced in 1928. The ability to produce a 
large number of ears per plant has not been a major 
characteristic of most of the varieties of sweet corn. 
One to two ears per stalk is the consistent record through- 
out the list. Burpee's Branching when introduced in 
1928 was promoted as a sensational new sweet corn 
because of the consistency with which the plants pro- 
duced 3 to 6 ears per stalk. Pictures of plants showing 
6 ears from one seed are shown in the catalogs which 
indicate that this production is the result of a strong 
branching habit of the plant. 

Early records show that in 1871 and 1872 a variety 
known as Judson's Branching Sugar was listed by 
Thorburn, Gregory and Vick. This corn was evidently 
a field variety but produced from 3 to 5 ears per stalk. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 92 days, in 
season with Early Evergreen, 6 days earlier than 
Egyptian and 5 days later than Crosby. Plants are 
1-1} 2 f eet shorter than those of Egyptian with a 
decidedly greater tendency to tiller, and having tassels 
much more slender and delicate. The ears are 2-3 
inches shorter than those of Egyptian, have 2—4- less 
rows, but possess kernels that are very similar in size, 
shape and degree of whiteness both in the milk and 
mature stages. Altho the name implies the production 
of several ears per plant, no abnormal condition was 
found to exist in trials at Geneva. The ears have, 
however, been found to be exceedingly attractive and 
uniform in shape and size. It is one of the few late 
varieties with small ears and kernels. Those growers 
interested in the production of moderately late corn that 
is not of collosal size will find this one pleasing. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 ' jj feet: stalks slender and moderately 
straight; nodes 10-12, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, 
slender, whorl incomplete, partially useful. Tillers very many, 
equal to and occasionally slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves 
medium long and moderately narrow, 30-32 x 2 3 4 -3 I 2 inches; 
sheath longer than internode. Tassel medium long and slender, 
16-18 inches, often streaked or solid red at the base; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, many present, 
medium long, crowded: bracts green, sparsely striped with red; 
anthers variable in color; 70-72 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th to 6th nodes, two ears per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present; shank short and very slender, 
2-3 inches. Husks few, light, medium length, wrapped loosely 
and easily removed, often lightly tinged with pale red along the 
margin of exposed area. Silk abundant, moderately long and 
rather easily removed. Husked ears moderately short and moder- 
ately slender, 6-7 x l'_»-l 5 s inches, moderately tapering; base 
compressed; tip abruptly conical and usually capped; rows 12, 
moderately straight, slightly irregular and twisted at the base, 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white; small, narrow and medium deep; 
at dry stage opalescent white, moderately long and narrow, thin, 
1.15 x .97 x .41 cm. (132 seeds per oz.); triangular; crown slightly 



24 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



rounded, occasionally somewhat converging; surface sparsely and 
coarsely wrinkled: set slightly loose on cob. 

Hi «..i.l Grained. Livingston's. Ref. 324. Syn. Broad 
Grained. Illus. 25. 

The existence of so many varieties of sweet corn 
is based on the actual measurable differences which 
exist in season, ear, or plant. This variety, intro- 
duced by the Livingston Seed Co. of Columbus, Ohio, 
about 1906, is as the name indicates, one with the 
broadest kernel of all sweet corns. It was selected for 
this character for several years prior to its introduction; 
moreover, the variety exists today in about its original 
form. The original corn from which Broad Grain was 
selected is not known, but the type is represented by 
Triumph which has been in existence since 1874. As 
first advertised it was offered to those who " enjoy 
running a knife blade down through the rows of grains 
before eating, there would be no dodging of the knife 
about the big grains." 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 99 days, 
about the same season as Stowell's Evergreen, 2 days 
later than Country Gentleman and 1 or 2 days earlier 
than Late Mammoth. The plants are equal in height 
to those of Stowell's Evergreen, the tassels being slightly 
longer and having laterals that are longer and more 
drooping. The ears are slightly longer and more slender, 
having kernels that are distinctly broader and shorter 
than Stowell's. This is the largest and latest 8-rowed 
sweet corn grown today. 

Plant tall, 7'2-7 3 i feet; stalks moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 10—12, somewhat exposed, moderately prominent; internodes 
slightly streaked with red on exposed portions. Brace roots present 
on one node, quite heavy and useful. Tillers moderately few, 
nearly as tall as central stalk. Leaves moderately long and broad, 
32-34 x 3' L >-4 inches; sheath equal to and often slightly shorter 
than internode. Tassel long and heavy, 21-22 inches; terminal 
spike erect to slightly drooping; lateral spikelets slightly drooping, 
many present, long, slender branched and moderately crowded; 
bracts green, moderately striped with red; anthers buff (pinard 
yellow to chamois); 72-74 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, often two ears per stalk, 
one occasionally a nubbin. Husks few and thick, short, rather 
tightly wrapped, difficult to remove. Husked ear long and medium 
plump, 9-10 x l 7 s-2 inches; partly cylindrical and slightly tapering 
near tip; base slightly expanded and open; tip conical, slightly 
exposed to capped; rows 8, occasionally paired, straight; furrows 
moderately deep and narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, large, broad and shallow; at dry 
stage dull creamy white, distinctly wide, medium depth and thick- 
ness, 1.0 x 1.3 x .36 cm. 192 seeds per oz. ); short broad oval in shape; 
crown rounded; surface shallowly and coarsely wrinkled; set tightly 
on cob. 

Burbank Early Maine. Refs. 16, 22, 23, 90, 91, 94, 99, 

105, 107, 121, 238, 291, 328, 329, 350, 367, 368, 

403, 411, 508, 510, 511, 515, 533, 536, 537, 538. 

Syns. Burbank Early, Burbank Early White, 

Early Maine, June 21st, Maine. 
This variety came from the state whose name 
it bears, and whose latitude is an indication of easi- 
ness in all vegetation. E. W. Burbank, the origi- 
nator, selected from Cory a type with larger ear, pure 
white cob with rich cream white kernel. Vaughan's 
Seed Store in 1891 was the introducer, and the variety 



was featured for several years by many of the seedsmen. 
Although not grown in trials at Geneva, experimental 
trials in other northern states indicate that edible 
maturity could be reached in about 80 days from the 
time of planting. 

Plant moderately short, 4 1 2-5 1 ■_> feet; stalks moderately heavy. 
Tillers usually absent. Tassel short and stiff; laterals simple. 
Ears borne low, 10-14 inches from the ground; husked ears moder- 
ately short and moderately plump, especially at the base, 6-7 x 
l?4-2 inches; distinctly tapering; base enlarged and often expanded; 
tip conical and fairly well filled; rows 8, rather irregular, with 
furrows prominent at the base. Kernels at milk stage white, 
medium size, broader than long; surface rough and irregular, usually 
coarsely wrinkled. 

Burr's Improved. Refs. 9, 14, 87, 271, 272, 433, 491, 
507, 508, 524, 533. Syns. Burr's Large Sweet or 
Sugar, Burr's Mammoth, Burr's Mammoth Sugar, 
Burr's New Sugar, Burr's Sweet. 

The name " Burr's Improved Wrinkled Sweet 
Corn " occurs in the U. S. Patent Office report for 
1855, page 165, where a comparative analysis of the 
corn cobs of 4 field corns and of 2 sweet corns was 
given. Burr in 1863 began his description of Burr's 
Improved (Syn. Burr's Sweet) with the sentence: 
" An improved form of the Twelve-rowed Sweet. The 
ears are from 12 to 16 rowed, rarely 18." 

The name Twelve-rowed Sweet would seem to be 
a rather definite term but early descriptions of the 
corn grown under this name describe ears of from 10 
to 16 rows. Wm. Charlton who in 1857 wrote a short 
essay on sweet corn for The Horticulturist describes 
Twelve-rowed Sweet: " This is rather short and small 
in the cob, averaging from 12-16 rows, deep not large 
seeds, fleshy, lightest yellow color when cooked." It 
would seem, therefore, that the Twelve-rowed Sweet 
was considerably mixed for ear type and number of 
rows and that selection could easily have been made 
which might have resulted in several new varieties 
based on a definite number of rows. 

There must have been a progenitor of this 12-16 
rowed corn, but we must admit failure to find an original 
source. From a rather brief history of sugar cane 
written about 1855 we find this paragraph: " The 
earliest records we have of the sugar-cane ( if we except 
a slight allusion by the prophet Job) are found in the 
writings of authors who lived 3 centuries before the 
Christian Era. From them, we simply learn that the 
history of this plant, like that of many other necessaries 
of life was involved in obscurity." This applies to the 
history of many varieties of sweet corn, among them 
Burr's Improved and its supposed precursor, Twelve- 
rowed Sweet. They came, but just how and just when 
is not known. The type continued, and the names to 
represent the type expanded like the fins of a fan. 
The basis for the following description is largely that 
secured from the work of Sturtevant and other early 
workers. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks heavy and straight. Ears borne 
30-36 inches from the ground. Husked ears long and very plump, 
8-10 x 2-2 ' 4 inches, slightly tapering; tip rounded and nearly 
capped; rows 12-16, rarely 18, usually straight and regular, crowded 
around the cob. Kernels at milk stage white, broad and deep; 




BLACK MEXICAN 



(Natural size) 













HICKORY KING 


ADAMS EARLY 


WHITE AUSTRALIAN 


ASSINIBOINE 


, ■' . 

u 
• 

SIOUX SQUAW 


BROAD GRAINED 


1 

STOWELL'S EVERGREEN 


1 

EARLY EVERGREEN 


! 

4 J 

NARROW GRAINED EVER- 
GREEN 


CINCINNATI MARKET 


COUNTRY GENTLEMAN 


WHIPPLE'S EARLY WHITE 


EARLY MARKET 


i 

CROSBY 


• 

MIDGET 


40 

BLACK MEXICAN 


CATAWBA 


DIGHTON 


CORY 


GOLDEN AGE 

o 

BANTING 


§ 4§ 

BANTAM EVERGREEN 


4* 

GOLD COIN 


SWEET ORANGE 


GOLDEN BANTAM 






< 


, 


i 


SUNSHINE 


CHARLEVOK 


GOLDEN GEM 


PAPAGO 


GOLDEN CREAM 




TYPES OF MAIZE SEEDS 


(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



25 



at dry stage dull, yellowish, semi-transparent, white, large, longer 
than broad; 108 seeds per oz., nearly rectangular in shape; crown 
nearly straight; surface abundantly and deeply wrinkled; set very 
loosely on cob. 

California. Refs. 106, 120, 513, 514. Syn. California 
Sweet. 
For several years following its introduction in 
1893. John Lewis Childs of Floral Park, New York, 
offered this as a late variety with ear of enormous size. 
One grower from Massachusetts wrote, " Its only fault 
is its size; to eat it from the cob requires a mouth like 
a crocodile." 

Catawba. Refs. 28, 39, 82, 531. Syn. Earliest Catawba. 
Illus. 25. 

Earliest Catawba was originated by the Rev. 
J. E. Tinker, Rock Stream, New York, at his home 
overlooking Seneca Lake. For 15 years after cross- 
ing a white variety with Black Mexican, Tinker care- 
fully selected ears for extreme earliness and uni- 
formity. In 1906 he sent a few ears to David Burpee 
for testing at Fordhook farms. Burpee's gardeners 
were so pleased with the distinct character and fine 
quality of the sample that a visit was made to Mr. 
Tinker's garden and arrangements made for the entire 
seed crop. W. Atlee Burpee & Co. of Philadelphia 
introduced Catawba in 1909 as " the first real rival yet 
discovered to our famous Golden Bantam." 

Rock Stream, New York, is located in the grape 
belt of the beautiful Finger Lakes region of central 
New York. The color of the ear of Catawba when dry, 
a dark purple shaded with red, is very much like the 
color of the Catawba grape from which came its name. 
The entire plant, stalk, tassels, blades or leaves, and the 
other husks on the ear are shaded heavily with dark red. 
This reddish coloring on the stalks and blades of the 
sweet corn plant has been valued by old gardeners as a 
sure indication of the finest flavor. 

Eighty -two days were required for this variety to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 3 days earlier 
than Red Cory and 5 days later than Surprise. The 
plants are about 1 foot taller than those of Honey Dew 
and possess about the same amount of red coloration 
along the margin and midribs of the foliage. The 
ears are borne on shanks considerably longer than those 
of Honey Dew while the husk ears are about the same 
length but slightly plumper. The edible kernels remain 
white for a very short time, soon turning various shades 
of deep red to maroon. The color change characteristic 
of Catawba has presented the same difficulty with refer- 
ence to marketing the product as did Black Mexican. 
On the whole it has not enjoyed the universal approval 
based on quality that the black sweet corn has, and is 
therefore usually considered for the home garden. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 J^ feet; stalks moderately slender and 
zigzag; nodes 9-10, slightly exposed and moderately prominent; 
internodes solid red over the surface. Brace roots usually not 
present. Tillers many, equal to central stalk in height. Leaves 
medium long and medium broad, 28-30 x 3 J j-4 inches, colored at 
the margin; midrib medium width, red, very prominent; pubescence 
very dense almost fuzzy at union of sheath and blade; sheath equal 
to and occasionally longer than internode, heavily streaked, almost 



solid dark red. Tassels moderately short and slender, 15-16 inches, 
entire tassel deep red in color; terminal spike drooping; lateral 
spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, moderately many and 
crowded; bracts dark green, heavily striped with a dark red, also a 
narrow dark green ring at the base; anthers uniformly yellow (pinard 
yellow) ; 63-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank moderately long, 4-5 
inches, slender and brittle. Husks medium number, thin, very long, 
rather tightly wrapped, exposed portions red, inner ones dark green. 
Silk scanty, moderately long and uniformly pale amber green in 
color. Husked ear moderately short and moderately slender, 
6-7 x l'o-l ; ^ inches, partly cylindrical and slightly tapering; 
base slightly enlarged and expanded; tip broadly conical to rounded, 
slightly exposed to capped; rows 8, occasionally paired, moderately 
straight, often irregular at the base; furrows deep and moderately 
narrow. 

Kernels at early milk stage silvery white but soon having 
various shades of red, moderately wide, and medium shallow; at 
dry stage dark reddish purple (dark vivid purple), also some nearly 
black, small, shorter than wide, .93 x 1.1 x .41 cm. (100 seeds per oz.); 
short, broad oval in shape; crown rounded, almost semi -circular; 
surface finely and abundantly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Champion. Refs. 22, 97, 121, 221, 238, 240, 241, 350, 
403, 405, 456, 513, 514, 515, 517, 518, 533. Syns. 
Champion Early, Champion Sugar, Improved 
Early Champion, New Champion, New Early 
Champion. 
In a letter from Henderson, the origin of Champion 
is credited to Everett B. Clark of Milford, Connecticut. 
It was introduced by Vaughan's Seed Store, Chicago, 
in 1894 and was soon listed by most of the leading seed 
houses of that period. Vaughan continued to list it until 
1931 but its period of greatest popularity was during the 
first 10 years of its existence. Favorable reports of its 
performance were received from all parts of the country 
and these encomiums and trial ground records led Hender- 
son to install the variety as a leader among the medium 
early corns. As originally introduced, it seems to have 
been a 12 -rowed variety, but Rice in 1918 describes 
Champion as 2 weeks later than Mammoth Cory; ears 
large, 14 to 16 rowed, with broad grains of fair quality. 

Chase, The. Ref. 165. 

A small eared variety similar to Cory in earliness, 
but with foliage heavily shaded with dark red. It was 
first offered by R. & J. Farquhar & Co. of Boston in 
1913, and discontinued in 1918. 

Chicago Market. Refs. 22. 89, 91, 121, 126, 137, 238, 
274, 367, 368, 397, 412, 487, 508, 514, 533, 535, 
536, 538. Syns. Ballard, Ballard's Early, Bal- 
lard's Extra Early, Ballard Red Cob, Chicago 
Early Market. 
This is one of the older varieties, introduced about 
1890 and having a run of popular notice until 1910. It 
was listed by Vaughan in 1889 and by Burpee in 1892. 
Neither the originator nor the introducer are known but 
according to a brief write-up in the catalog for 1892 of 
the Mohawk Valley Seed Co., Canajoharie, New York, 
it was a cross between Early Pratt and Moore's Concord. 
This would account for the occasional appearance of a 
pink cob. The variety was sometimes listed as Ballards 
Early and the name Ballard Red Cob occurs in the 1894 
catalog of the Perry Seed Store, Syracuse, New York. 



26 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant short, 4-4j^ feet, stalks slender; tassels short, stiff, 
slender and simple. Tillers few, much shorter than central stalk. 
Ears borne low, 12-15 inches from the ground; husked ear short and 
moderately slender, 5-6 '_> x 1J£-15^ inches, nearly cylindrical; 
tip abruptly tapered; rows 12, straight, regular, crowded around the 
cob. Kernels at milk stage white to pale flesh color, moderately 
broad, shallow; at dry stage very pale pinkish red; nearly white, 
rather small, nearly as long as broad, broad ovate; crown slightly 
rounded; surface very sparsely and shallowly wrinkled, nearly 
smooth. 

Cincinnati Market. Ref. 336. Syns. Club Zig Zag, 
Club Zig Zag Evergreen. Illus. 25. 

The J. M. McCullough's Sons Co., Cincinnati, 
Ohio, introduced this new variety in 1922. Three 
years later it was offered by the J. Chas. McCullough 
Seed Co., also of Cincinnati. Other than the fact 
that this variety originated in the Cincinnati market 
area, information on its history is not available. The 
term zig zag is perhaps descriptive in relation to the 
kernel pattern of the ear but it is somewhat confus- 
ing because of its former use for Zig Zag Evergreen, a 
much older and different variety. 

At Geneva this was the latest white sweet corn to 
come into production, 103 days being required to 
reach edible maturity. This was 6 days later than 
Country Gentleman and 5 days later than Late Mam- 
moth and Long Island Beauty. The plants are more 
stocky and have shorter internodes than those of Country 
Gentleman giving them the appearance of being more 
leafy. The foliage appears to be somewhat lighter green 
in color. The ears are 1 1 2~2 inches shorter and much 
less tapering than those of Country Gentleman; like- 
wise the kernels are distinctly thicker, less tapering, 
and usually not as deep. 

Plant tall, 7-7 ] •> feet: stalks straight and heavy; nodes 14-16; 
covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, rather slender, whorl 
complete on one node, useful. Tillers few, somewhat shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium broad, 32-34 x 
3 1 2 _ 4 , _> inches; sheath distinctly longer than internode. Tassels 
moderately long, 18-20 inches, rather heavy, coarse and bushy; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly horizontal, very 
many present, distinctly crowded, multi-branched; bracts green, 
moderately striped with red; anthers buff (deep colonial buff 
to chamois i ; 74-76 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 6th and 7th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank short and medium heavy, 2-3 
inches. Husk leaves few, short and distinctly light. Husks many, 
medium long, heavy, thick, tightly WTapped and difficult to remove. 
Silk very abundant, long and uniformly red, difficult to remove. 
Husked ear medium long and moderately plump, 6J£-7J^ x 1 3 4~2 
inches, moderately tapering; base compressed; tip abruptly conical, 
somewhat exposed; rows absent. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, narrow and thick, 
moderately deep; at dry stage dull white, much longer than wide, 
very thick, 1.15 x .70 x .52 cm. (160 seeds per oz. ; cuneate; crown 
very slightly rounded; surface deeply and abundantly wrinkled; set 
loosely on cob. 

Cleveland's < lolossal. Refs. 94, 95, 275, 367, 368, 487, 
533. Syn. Colossal. 
Cleveland"s Colossal was grown in the trial grounds 
at the experiment stations of Nebraska, Vermont, 
New York and Tennessee during the years 1889 and 
1891 and was described as a late variety with large 
thick ears, broad grains set close on the ear. I 



Colossal Early. Maule's. Refs. 355, 401. Syns. 
Colossal Early, Colossal Extra Early. 
The name Colossal brings to mind something 
immense or huge. As used for this variety of sweet 
corn it was intended to serve as a descriptive name 
for an early variety producing an extra large ear. 
Little is known about the history of the variety except 
that it was introduced in 1911 by Wm. Henry Maule 
of Philadelphia and has continued to be one of the lead- 
ing sorts offered by that concern. 

Plant tall, 8 feet; tillers few, slightly shorter than central 
stalk. Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, two ears per stalk. Husked 
ears moderately long and plump, 8-9 x 1 " s -2 ' g inches, moderately 
tapering; rows 12-14, moderately straight. Kernels at milk stage 
white, medium size; at dry stage pale amber white, longer than wide, 
1.12 x .93 x .4 cm.; triangular in shape; surface abundantly but 
coarsely wrinkled and creased; set loosely on cob. 

Columbia. Refs. 116, 348, 565. Syns. Early Columbia, 
Extra Early Columbia, Upson's Columbia. 

Upson's Columbia was offered in 1913 by Condon 
Brothers, Rockford. Illinois, as an acquisition of rare 
value. It was said to have been selected from Early 
Champion and in the Mississippi Valley it has continued 
to be very popular as a second early. In recent years 
stocks of Columbia have been offered by eastern seed 
houses, among them F. H. Woodruff & Sons, Caldwell 
& Jones, Chas. C. Hart Seed Company, and Comstock, 
Ferre & Company. This new Columbia, first offered 
in 1929, appears to be different from the earlier intro- 
duction and may have been selected from 60-day Make 
Good. It produces larger ears and is slightly later 
than its parent. 

At Geneva Alneer's strain produced ears in 90 days 
while plants grown from the stock procured from Com- 
stock, Ferre & Company had ears ready in 79 days. 
The ears were attractive, generally 12 -rowed, but show- 
ing variation from 10 to 14 rows. 

Columbus Market. Refs. 238, 323, 328, 329, 403, 
405, 533. 

This variety was introduced by A. W. Living- 
ston's Sons, Columbus, Ohio, in 1896. The intro- 
ducers at the time wrote: " Over all the multiplied 
varieties now offered (this variety) possesses one great 
advantage, and that is in its very large size for such an 
early sort. It comes into the market with the second 
earlies, such as Pee and Kay, Shakers Early, Livingston's 
Evergreen but is fully twice as large as any of them." 
The variety was not widely listed but was grown by 
both C. S. Clark and by the Jerome B. Rice Co. Con- 
trary to the history of many of the varieties introduced 
about this time it has been continued and is today used 
to a considerable extent in Ohio. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 90 days, 
2 days later than Howling Mob and 7 days earlier than 
Hickox. The plants grow 1-1 ' •_> feet taller than those 
of Howling Mob, internodes are longer and less streaked 
with red on the sheath. The ears are borne about the 
same height as on Howling Mob but are attached to 
much shorter shanks. The husk leaves are decidedly 
shorter and less prominent, and the husked ears, although 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



27 



quite similar, are consistently rounded at the tip instead 
of conical. 

Plant tall, 7-7' _> feet; stalks heavy and straight: nodes 10-12, 
slightly exposed, not very prominent; internodes streaked with red 
at the base of the nodes. Brace roots present, heavy, whorl com- 
plete on one node, useful. Tillers moderately many, nearly as 
tall as central stalk. Leaves long, moderately broad, 33-35 x 4 1 .-5 
inches: sheath equal to and often slightly shorter than the internode. 
Tassels moderately long, 18-20 inches, moderately heavy and coarse, 
occasionally streaked with red at the base: bracts and anthers 
variable in color; 65-66 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank short and heavy, 2-3 
inches. Husk leaves few, very short and light. Husks many, 
rather heavy, medium long, rather tightly wrapped but not very 
difficult to remove. Silk long and abundant, variable in color. 
Husked ear moderately long and medium plump, 8-9 x 1;^-1 . 
inches, slightly tapering: base compressed, tip abruptly conical 
and nearly capped; rows 14-16, straight, occasionally somewhat 
irregular at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather narrow and medium depth: 
at dry stage amber white, rather small, broad as long, .97 x .92 x .36 
cm. (120 seeds per oz. i; nearly square; crown slightly rounded: 
surface abundantly but very shallowly wrinkled; set slightly loose 
on cob. 

Connecticut Beauty. Ref. 294. 

The Johnson Seed Company of Philadelphia intro- 
duced Connecticut Beauty in 1913 as an early variety 
of extra fine quality. The ear was from 6 to 7 inches 
long and 12 -rowed. 

Cook's Special. Ref. 413. 

The Vineland Station, Ontario, Canada, in 1918 
considered this a very promising variety. Seed for 
trial was received from G. S. Peart of Burlington who 
secured seed from the originator, a gardener at Kingston, 
Ontario. It matured about the same season as Early 
Malcolm and produced an ear of 8 to 10 rows of deep 
kernels. 

Cory. Refs. 16, 22, 28, 61, 67, 74, 89, 90, 91, 93, 120, 
121, 123, 125, 126, 188, 207, 208, 214, 217, 238, 
240, 241, 278, 298, 328, 329, 335, 338, 345, 348, 
350, 367, 368, 397, 403, 405, 411, 441, 444, 478, 
487, 503, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 514, 518, 525, 
533, 535, 536, 537, 538, 546. Syns. Cory Early 
Sugar, Cory Sugar, Earliest of All, Earliest Rock- 
ford Market, Early Cory, Early Red Cory, Early 
Red Cob Cory, Early Rockford Market, Early 
Sweet Cory, Extra Early Cory, Extra Early Red 
Cory, First of All, La Crosse Early, La Crosse 
Sweet, Pink, Pink Cob Cory, Red Cob Cory, 
Red Cory, Salzer No. 48, Sweet Cory. Illus. 25. 
Arising to prominence chiefly through the medium 
of earliness, Cory has, since its introduction in 1885, 
been perhaps the most widely used of all the small 
eared white varieties. The introduction of this variety 
was due solely to the great interest of James J. H. 
Gregory in producing new things. A review of his 
early catalogs cannot help but impress one with the 
keenness and diligence with which Mr. Gregory searched 
for and tried out every new vegetable which came to 
his attention. 

Mr. Gregory gave the story of Cory in his catalog 



of 1885. " Having been told by a friend (Henry C. 
Anthony^ who marketed largely in Fall River and 
Providence, that the market men in his vicinity had 
found an earlier sweet corn of market size than the 
Early Marblehead, I took a journey to his vicinity 
(about 50 miles i to call around among his neighbors, and 
learn directly from their lips what they had to say about 
it. I saw several of them and from others who were 
not at home when I called I received statements after 
I returned. It appears that a Mr. Wm. Cory for years 
had a monopoly of the early market in early sweet corn : 
that in the course of time he gave a little to two or three 
of his friends, and it became known as the Cory corn." 

This little cluster of marketmen who raised the 
Cory corn included some of the pioneer market gardeners 
of the country, among them being Chas. J. Talman, 
Wm. Lisson, John F. Chace, Chas. N. Dyer, and M. B. 
Sylvin. All united in testifying to the earliness of the 
variety, when grown in comparison with Early Marble- 
head. In general appearance it resembled Marble- 
head; and Gregory had no doubt but that the new Corj- 
came from Marblehead. For the next 10 years this was 
the leading variety of sweet corn grown. It was one of 
those varieties with a name which seemed to have an 
exceedingly popular appeal and was undeniably the 
earliest sort that could be grown. Its decline in use 
came only when the desire for earliness was followed by 
a preference for the newer varieties with larger ears. 
Cory must stand out as the most popular variety 
developed in the period previous to 1890. 

Cory required 85 days to produce edible ears at 
Geneva. This was 3 days earlier than White Cory, 
about the same season as Kendel's Early Giant, and 
over two weeks later than Etighton. The plants are 
about 1 foot shorter than those of White Cory, less 
consistently tillered and have slightly shorter tassels 
which are red at the base instead of green. The husked 
ears are slightly shorter and more tapering, showing an 
occasional 10-rowed ear instead of being uniformly 8. 
The variety is little grown at the present time, having 
been largely replaced by the strain having a white cob 
and larger kernel. 

Plant medium tall, 4 3 4 -5' i feet; stalks slender and straight to 
slightly zigzag; nodes 8-9, slightly exposed, not very prominent; 
internodes streaked with red on exposed surfaces. Brace roots 
present on one node but not complete nor very useful. Tillers few 
to occasionally many, nearly as tall as central stalk. Leaves medium 
long and medium broad, 30-32 x 3 ' j-A inches; sheath usually shorter 
than but occasionally equal to internode. Tassel medium long and 
slender, 16—18 inches, occasionally streaked with red at the base; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets many, horizontal to slightly 
drooping, short and crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped with 
light red; anthers variable in color; 62-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd. 4th and 5th nodes, often two ears per stalk, 
one occasionally a nubbin. Shank variable in length, 3-8 inches. 
Husk leaves moderately many, long and heavy. Husks heavy, 
short and tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately short and 
slender, 6-7 x l'^-l'^ inches, moderately tapering; base slightly 
expanded and open; tip long conical and slightly exposed: rows 
8-10, usually regular but often paired, somewhat irregular at the 
base; crowded around cob: otherwise furrows deep and narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, often pale red at the stylar attach- 
ment; wide, shallow and medium thickness; at dry stage pale reddish 



28 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



brown (pecan brown); blending into a more yellow shade on the 
embryo side; medium size, broad and short, .9 x 1.04 x .4 cm. 
(120 seeds per oz.); short, broad oval in shape; crown distinctly 
rounded, almost semi-circular; surface sparsely and very shallowly 
wrinkled, almost smooth; set tightly on red cob. 

Cosmopolitan. Refs. 66, 78, 241, 403, 517, 518, 533, 
546. Syn. Early Cosmopolitan. 

For many years early varieties with small ears of 8 to 
1 rows outnumbered the varieties with larger ears. This 
position was gradually reversed as the years went on until 
there were more and more large-eared varieties on the 
market. Growers found it difficult to market small-eared 
early corn after the large ears had been taken to market. 
New varieties of sweet corn fairly early and with large 
attractive ears were quickly taken up by the growers. 

Such was the case with Cosmopolitan which origi- 
nated with Everett B. Clark of Connecticut and was 
introduced by W. Atlee Burpee in 1901. It was accepted 
as a worthwhile sort and offered by all major seed houses. 
As a measure of its popularity we would point out that 
it was listed by Burpee until 1923 when its place was 
probably taken by Burpee's Delicious. In some respects 
it resembled Early Champion, Metropolitan and Howling 
Mob. The ears were 7 to 9 inches long with 12 rows 
and were well filled to the tip. A weakness of the 
variety was the occasional rather insecure stalk which 
grew 5 to 6 feet high. 

Country Gentleman. Refs. 74, 76, 95, 120, 121, 123, 
124, 126, 207, 208, 220, 238, 240, 241, 290, 295, 328, 
329, 335, 338, 344, 348, 350, 368, 403, 404, 405, 
412, 445, 446, 447, 449, 474, 478, 498, 503, 508, 
510, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516, 517, 518, 525, 533, 
546, 549, 562. Syns. Improved Country Gentle- 
man, " Shoe Peg." Illus. 25. 
Country Gentleman, a variety name which was 14 
years in the coming, was originated for the express pur- 
pose of excelling the Shoe Peg corn in size. It was in- 
troduced in 1890 by Frank C. Woodruff of S. D. Woodruff 
& Sons, Orange, Connecticut, and a year later by Peter 
Henderson & Co. of New York. The name, and the 
variety pattern it represented followed the succession of 
Quaker Sweet to Ne Plus Ultra to Shoe Peg. Each had 
been selected for a larger sized ear, for as Gregory said in 
1893, " who that has raised that sweetest of all varieties of 
sugar corn which we were the first to catalog under the 
name of ' Quaker Sweet ' has not regretted that the ear 
was so small as to make it difficult to market it? " The 
new introduction was received with such general acclaim 
that no improvement has been required to make Country 
Gentleman the best of its type. 

Ninety-seven days were required to reach the mature 
edible stage at Geneva. This was 1 day earlier than 
Stowell's Evergreen, 6 days earlier than Cincinnati 
Market and 2 days later than The Henderson. 

Plants are about the same height as those of Cincin- 
nati Market, but lack the stockiness and short internodes 
of that variety. The ears are longer and more tapering, 
while the kernels are distinctly smaller and deeper. 
The majority of home garden enthusiasts recognize 
two late or main crop varieties — Country' Gentleman 



and Stowell's Evergreen. Country Gentleman has long 
been one of the universally well known and liked sweet- 
corn varieties. It is easy to understand, then, how a 
variety of such wide acquaintance has remained as a 
popular favorite these many years. Its usage is not 
altogether confined to the home garden, since consider- 
able acreage is grown for the fresh market and the canning 
industry. The sweetness and tenderness of kernel has 
been appreciated by everyone who has used it. 

Plant tall, 7-7 ' ■> feet; stalk moderately heavy, straight; 
nodes 12-14, covered, not prominent, shaded with red at the base. 
Brace roots present on 1st and occasionally 2nd nodes, moderately 
heavy, whorl complete, useful. Tillers variable in number, slightly 
shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium 
broad, 32-34 x 3? j-4 inches; sheath longer than and occasionally 
equal to internode. Tassels long, heavy, coarse and very bushy, 
20-22 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal, very 
many present, multi-branched, moderately long and very crowded; 
bracts green, rather heavily striped with dark red; anthers uniformly 
dark red van dyke to vinaceous russet ) ; 76-77 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne on the 5th and 6th nodes, often two ears per stalk; 
one occasionally a nubbin; shank short and moderately slender, 2-3 
inches. Husks many, rather thin, moderately short, loosely wrapped 
and easily removed. Silk decidedly abundant, very long, uniformly 
dark red, not easily removed. Husked ear moderately long and 
plump, 8-9 x 23 s— 2 J 4 inches, decidedly tapering; base enlarged 
and compressed; tip long conical, slightly exposed; without regular 
rows, exceedingly crowded and close fitting around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, very long and narrow; at dry stage 
dull white, very long, slender, peg-like or cuneate in shape, 1.29 x 
.50 x .31 cm. 1 230 seeds per oz.}; crown angular, usually irregularly 
dimple-dented; surface rough, deeply and coarsely wrinkled; set 
rather loosely on cob. 

Crosby. Refs. 14, 17, 25, 61, 65, 73, 74, 89, 90, 91, 93, 
95, 120, 122, 123, 197, 199, 207, 208, 214, 218, 236, 
238, 240, 241, 243, 310, 328, 329, 367, 368, 397, 
403, 404, 406, 407, 408, 410, 414, 422, 430, 442, 
444, 456, 487, 503, 507, 508, 533, 535, 536, 545. 
Syns. " Boston Market," Crosby Dwarf Sugar, 
Crosby Early Dwarf, Crosby's Early Sugar, 
Crosby Early 12 -Row. Des Moines, Early 
Crosby, Early Des Moines, Extra Early Crosby, 
Fottler's Early, Harris Sweet, Maine Crosby, 
Market Gardener, Medium Crosby, Original 
Crosby, True Crosby. Illus. 25, 30. 
This sweet corn is one of the oldest of all varieties. 
It bears the name of Josiah Crosby who was also the 
originator of the Crosby Beet. Josiah Crosby, who was 
born in 1805, did not become a farmer on his own land 
until the year 1847 when he moved to Arlington, Massa- 
chusetts, and began an experience of 40 years as a market 
gardener, in which he had no superiors and few equals. 
A memorial resolution published in the 1887 Trans- 
actions of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society says, 
" he earnestly strove to attain excellence and in the effort 
to improve the quality of market vegetables, he originated 
the excellent variety of sweet corn which was named for 
him." 

Sturtevant claims that Crosby was introduced in 
1860 which seems probable since it was listed by Thor- 
burn in 1871, Breck in 1870, Vick, 1870, and by Gregory 
in 1867. Its origin is quite unknown since it differs 
from any of the types then known. In the deep kernel 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



29 



pattern, however, it does bear resemblance to some of 
the evergreen varieties. 

Many writers consider it unsurpassed in quality; 
certainly its use gained for the Maine sweet corn canners 
a reputation for unusual quality and excellence. Gregory 
in 1869 says. " Most every early variety of sweet corn 
is too small for market, this is 12 and sometimes 14 
rowed, of good market size, and very sweet. Crosby's 
Early is the standard in Boston Market." Crosby 
itself was sometimes known as Boston Market, being 
so listed in 1868 by Curtis and Cobb and in 1871 by 
H. E. Acker. There are many existing strains of this 
well known variety but the original qualities which 
made it so individual remain in present day stocks. 

At Geneva 87 days were required for this variety 
to produce edible ears. This proved to be 1 or 2 days 
later than Minnesota Crosby, in season with Alameda 
and Howling Mob, and 3 days earlier than Quincy 
Market. The plants are considerably more slender and 
1 1 ' 2 feet shorter than those of Howling Mob; likewise 
the tassel, altho of equal length, is much more slender 
and feathery than that of Howling Mob. The husked 
ears differ from other varieties in possessing very small, 
more uniformly sized and shaped kernels, straighter 
rows and more abruptly rounded, more uniformly 
and well filled tips. The compactness of the kernels 
and rows is only approached by some near relative 
of Crosby such as Quincy Market. Crosby has been 
widely accepted and grown for the canning industry 
particularly in the northeastern part of the United 
States. In the New England states it is the lead- 
ing variety for this purpose, and has done much to 
create the favorable reputation that Maine grown 
canned sweet corn enjoys. 

Plant moderately tall, 5' i 4-6 1 j feet; stalks slender, slightly- 
zigzag: nodes 10-12, moderately exposed, somewhat prominent; 
internodes streaked with red on exposed portions, especially at the 
base of the nodes. Brace roots present, rather slender, not very 
useful. Tillers many, much shorter than central stalk. Leaves 
moderately short and moderately narrow, 26-28 x 3-3'j inches; 
sheath shorter than internode. Tassel long and heavy, 20-22 
inches, rather feathery: terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
drooping, many, long, multi-branched and moderately crowded; 
bracts green, moderately striped with red; anthers variable in 
color; 63-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one often a nubbin. Shank moderately long, 5-8 
inches, slender but somewhat tough. Husk leaves many, long and 
heavy. Husks moderately many, medium long, rather loosely 
wrapped, easily removed. Husked ear medium long and moder- 
ately plump, 7-8 x 1?4~2 inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly tapered; 
base enlarged and compressed: tip abruptly conical; rows 12-16, 
regular, straight, crowded around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, very small, narrow, rather thick 
and deep: at dry stage opalescent white, moderately long and 
narrow, .94 x .70 x .40 cm. 1 188 seeds per oz.), long triangular in 
shape; crown nearly square; surface very finely, abundantly but 
shallowly wrinkled; set nearly tight on white cob. 

A strain of Crosby known as Minnesota Crosby 
is used in some sections as a canning variety. It is 
not listed by the regular seedsmen inasmuch that its 
use as a canning variety has limited it to growers with 
that market. 



Crosby Minnesota came into production about the 
same time as regular Crosby. The plants are slightly 
taller than those of Crosby and possess ears that are 
longer and more tapering, lacking the abruptly conical 
to rounded tip characteristic of Crosby. 
Cupid. Refs. 263, 298, 345. Syns. New Cupid, Sugar 
Sweet. 

" There is an old saw, often quoted to the effect 
that ' good things come in small packages.' " This 
was the foreword by which Peter Henderson & Co. 
of New York introduced New Cupid in 1923. A few 
ears of a surprisingly sweet corn were obtained in 1918 
from M. A. Albertson of Nutley, New Jersey. They 
were very small ears, about 2 * o inches in length, but were 
very sweet. The ears were so small that there was 
scarcely a mouthful on them, but by selection the size 
was increased and the sweetness and tenderness retained. 
Henderson changed the name Cupid to Sugarsweet in 
1922 and again stressed its value as a corn for the road- 
side stand or the sweet corn for the connoisseur. 

Cupid or Sugar Sweet produced edible ears at Geneva 
in 80 days, 5 days later than Early June, in season with 
Whipple's Early and 4 days earlier than Early Pearl. 
The plants are 1-1 l o feet taller than those of Early June 
with a decidedly greater tendency to tiller and with tassels 
having both terminal and lateral spikelets longer and 
more drooping. The husked ears are of equal length 
but those of Cupid are somewhat more plump, contain 
2—4 more rows of kernels and are decidedly more abruptly 
conical to rounded at the tip. The edible product has 
been found to be very tender and sweet. As a home 
garden sort for those who desire variety, Cupid is worthy 
of trial. 

Plant moderately short, 4};j-5 feet; stalk slender, straight; 
nodes 7—9, covered, not prominent; internodes show exposed por- 
tions streaked with light red. Tillers many present, slightly shorter 
than central stalk, often terminate in a pistillate inflorescence, 
occasionally bearing a small ear. Leaves moderately short and mod- 
erately narrow, 25-28 x 3-3 ] 2 inches; sheath longer than internode. 
Tassel moderately short and slender, 14—16 inches; terminal spike 
erect, lateral spikelets slightly drooping, moderately many, short 
and somewhat crowded; bracts green, rather heavily striped with 
dark red; anthers golden yellow deep colonial buff to chamois); 
58-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, often two ears per stalk with 
additional nubbins occasionally present. Shank short, 2-3 inches, 
slender and moderately brittle. Husks moderately few, rather 
light, loosely wrapped and easily removed. Silk moderately abund- 
ant, decidedly long and uniformly red in color. Husked ear moder- 
ately short and slender, 5-7 x 1 J 4 -l > ■< inches; nearly cylindrical, very 
slightly tapering; base rounded; tips decidedly rounded and usually 
capped: rows 10-12, straight, slightly irregular at base, crowded 
around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately small, medium wide, 

shallow and quite uniform; at dry stage opalescent white, small, 

narrow, short and thin, .9 x .8 x .38 cm. (.152 seeds per oz.); usually 

short triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface often 

abundantly and finely wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Darling's Earl>. Refs. 45, 87, 89, 91, 255, 268, 269, 

343, 397, 410, 411, 412, 422, 428, 507, 508, 524, 

533, 537, 539. Syns. Darling, Darling's Sugar, 

Sugar Productive. 

" Darling's " is possibly the first proper name 
to be associated with a variety of sweet corn. The 



30 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



list of varieties existing at the time of its introduction 
was confined to Papoon, Eight-rowed Early, Dwarf 
Early and Sweet or Sugar. Noyes Darling wrote the 
story of its origination to the Albany Cultivator from 
New Haven, Connecticut, Nov. 18, 1844. This was 
published in the Annual Report of the U. S. D. A. of 
1845, page 446. The story of the steps taken to pro- 
duce a new variety is most illuminating: The original 
crossing, the segregation of the promising recombinations 
and the selection and trial of the most promising line 
until such time as it resulted in a pure or unmixed stock. 

The original cross must have been made about 1836. 
Seed of a very early yellow corn was planted in a patch 
of sweet or shrivelled corn " then considerably grown." 
The tops or blossoms of the yellow corn were cut off in 
order that the early corn might be impregnated only by 
the sweet corn. The result the first year was yellow 
corn of the usual size and appearance, although a mixture 
of yellow and white smooth corn and sweet or shrivelled 
corn occurred on some cobs. The third year planting 
(from smooth and shrivelled seed planted separately) 
produced ears for the most part that corresponded with 
the kernels planted. There was a slight mixing of the 
shrivelled on the smooth and of the smooth on the 
shrivelled. 

The next year the two kinds were again planted 
separately and the smooth corn produced its like as did 
the shrivelled. The latter had the disadvantage of being 
yellow, but was earlier than common sweet corn and 
equally palatable. Was this the precursor of Golden 
Nugget and Golden Bantam? Its value was not appreci- 
ated and it was accordingly dropped from further con- 
sideration. The fifth year white and yellow smooth 
corns were planted separately and the earliness of the 
separate plants carefully watched. The sixth year, 
the early and late were planted separately and upon a 
few ears of the earliest variety a few scattering kernels 
of a white sweet corn were noticed. These were care- 
fully picked out and planted by themselves. The result 
was a white sweet corn fit for boiling July 18. 

Mr. Darling closed his remarks with, " My object 
in instituting this experiment having been to obtain 
a corn suitable in color and early maturity for marketing, 
I discarded the yellow varieties closing the experiment 
in possession of an eight -rowed sweet corn with ears 
6 to 7 inches long and fit for boiling 18th July fin 1844, 
14th)." This corn became Darling's Early listed by 
Hovey & Co. in 1859 and others. It was one of the 
varieties described by Burr in 1863 and was one of four 
varieties named by Henderson in 1867. It was listed 
until the last decade of the century when a number of 
varieties of similar type were introduced differing only 
slightly from the original Darling's Early. 

The brief description included in this account is a 
compilation of data from several sources, and will 
serve to indicate the type which was subsequently 
selected by seedsmen. 

Plant moderately tall, 5}. .-7 feet; stalks slender. Tassel 
slender with laterals decidedly drooping. Ears borne 22-28 inches 
from the ground, possess few short husk leaves. Dried ear medium 



long, 6-8 x l :! s -l?s inches, nearly cylindrical, frequently somewhat 
curved; rows 8, regular, pairs distinct. Kernels at dry stage whitish 
amber, broader than long, 107 seeds per oz. ; crown distinctly 
rounded, surface rather abundantly wrinkled; set tightly in the 
row. 

Delicious. Refs. 38, 267, 358, 502, 519. 

Delicious as the name of a variety of sweet corn 
has been used by three different seed companies. The 
first to appear was Michell's Delicious introduced in 
1899 by Henry F. Michell Co. of Philadelphia. This 
was a second early which had been selected by an 
old Philadelphia gardener and carefully selected for 
well filled ears and pearly whiteness of kernel. The 
variety has been perpetuated by Michell and is still 
listed among the medium sugar corns. 

The Holmes Seed Company of Harrisburg, Pennsyl- 
vania, named and introduced Holmes' Delicious in 1907. 
This came from Wm. K. Harris, a Philadelphia florist and 
gardener who believed it to be the most delicious corn 
ever. This variety, as Holmes' Delicious, was also 
listed in 1911 by Gregory. When the Holmes Seed 
& Nursery Co. was discontinued in 1923, the strain was 
lost but has since been reoffered by the Holmes Seed Co. 
of Canton, Ohio. 

Delicious, Burpee. Refs. 83, 348, 534. Syn. Early 
White. 

The most recent introduction of a sweet corn by 
this name was by the W. Atlee Burpee Co. of Philadelphia 
in 1924. 

This had originated with Dr. Herbert Hoffman of 
Merchantville, New Jersey, who at the same time had 
begun the selection work which resulted in its com- 
panion variety, Sunnybrook. Both came from a single 
ear of Bantam type bearing yellow and white kernels 
found in a planting of Golden Bantam. Eight years of 
selection followed, and " this was ready to introduce 
as a white sort, similar to Golden Bantam in quality," 
although much later in season and with larger ear. 

Ninety-four days were required for edible ears 
to be produced at Geneva. This was 3 days earlier 
than Hickox, in season with Nector and 6 days later 
than Howling Mob. The plants are about one foot 
shorter than those of Hickox, having shorter internodes 
and a greater tendency to tiller. The husked ears are 
much alike, although Delicious will often have more 
rows. In the dry stage the kernels of Delicious appear 
whiter and less amber colored, and are slightly broader. 
This variety is grown chiefly for the market and home 
garden, although it appears to have as much in its 
favor from the standpoint of appearance, vigor and 
number of ears per plant as Hickox, a variety used 
widely for canning. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
straight; nodes 12-13, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, 
moderately heavy, whorl complete and useful on one node. Tillers 
many, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately 
long and medium broad, 30-32 x 3} 2—4 inches; sheath longer than 
internode. Tassel moderately long and moderately slender, 18-20 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly 
drooping, moderately many, medium long, rather crowded and 
multi-branched; bracts green, sparsely striped with pale red; 




CROSBY 



(Three-quarters natural size) 




EARLY MARKET 



(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



31 



anthers reddish bronze (terra cotta to vinaceous russet); 68-70 
days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th, 6th and 7th nodes, usually two ears per stalk 
with an additional nubbin occasionally present. Shank moderately 
long, 5 6 inches, medium heavy. Husk leaves moderately few, 
short and light. Husks moderately many, long and tightly wrapped, 
rather difficult to remove. Silk abundant, long and easily removed. 
Husked ears moderately long and moderately plump, 8-9 x 1 , 2 
inches: slightly tapering; base moderately compressed to slightly 
open; tip conical, slightly exposed and occasionally capped; rows 
12-14, straight, occasionally curved, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, distinctly thick; 
at dry stage opalescent white, slightly longer than wide, 1.1 x .95 
x .42 cm. (100 seeds per oz.); triangular in shape; crown rounded; 
surface abundantly and rather deeply wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Dighton. Refs. 185, 300, 335, 345, 348, 478, 485, 563. 
Syns. Early Buffalo, Early Dighton, " Early 
Wonder -Woodruff," Extra Early Dighton, Portu- 
guese, Wayahead. Illus. 25. 
This very early white variety was a selection from 
either Extra Early Dawn or Red Cob Cory and was intro- 
duced in 1922 by S. D. Woodruff & Sons, Orange, 
Connecticut. The selection was named for the town of 
Dighton, Massachusetts, where it was first used. For 
several years following its introduction it was the earliest 
corn appearing on the Boston Market, but had little 
except earliness to commend it. The name Portuguese 
was sometimes used in connection with the variety but 
this apparently has little significance. 

Edible maturity was obtained at Geneva in 69 days, 
and proved to be. with the exception of Pickaninny, 
which came in 67 days, the earliest of all sweet corn 
varieties. This was 6 days earlier than Alpha and 
16 days earlier than Red Cory. The plants have a 
decidedly greater tendency to tiller and a tassel that is 
considerably more heavily marked with red. The ears 
are of similar size and shape with furrows more promi- 
nent and kernels in the dry state more uniform and 
deeper reddish brown in color. Its chief attribute is 
earliness, and as such is used to a considerable extent by 
home gardeners. 

Plant short, 3J£— 4j^ feet; stalk slender, slightly zigzag; nodes 
7-8, exposed, prominent; exposed portions of internodes slightly 
streaked with light red. Brace roots usually not present; tillers 
usually numerous, somewhat shorter than central stalk. Leaves 
short and moderately narrow, 20-25 x 3-3 ' ■> inches; sheath shorter 
than internode. Tassel short and slender, 14—15 inches; base 
heavily streaked to solid dark red; terminal spike erect; lateral 
spikelets nearly erect, few, simple, decidedly short and scattered; 
bracts green, quite heavily striped with dark red, occasionally 
ringed with red at the base; anthers bronze red (terra cotta to 
vinaceous russet); 55-57 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and two ears per stalk 
with one usually a nubbin. Shank medium long, 3-5 inches, 
slender, brittle. Husks few, thick, easily removed, short, rather 
tightly wTapped. Husk leaves few and short. Husked ear medium 
long and moderately slender, 6-8 x l'_.-l s s inches; moderately to 
decidedly tapering; base somewhat expanded and open; tip conical 
and exposed; rows 8—10, noticeably paired, straight, not crowded 
around cob; furrows moderately deep and occasionally rather wide. 

Kernels at milk stage creamy white, moderately narrow, thin 
and shallow, not very uniform; at dry stage deep brownish red 
(hay's russet), with the base much lighter in color; medium size, 
short and medium wide, .92 x 1.18 x .40 cm. (96 seeds per oz. ); 
short, broad oval in shape; crown rounded; surface coarsely and 
shallowly wrinkled; set tight on red cob. 



Dolly Dutton. Refs. 22, 87, 89, 91, 340, 397, 411, 426, 
427, 507, 508, 535, 536, 537. Syns. Early Dutton, 
Dutton. 
The group of early varieties to which Dolly Dut- 
ton belonged was characterized by the smallness of 
the plant and ear, as well as by earliness of season. 
Introduced about 1878, it was described by Sturtevant 
in 1884 and offered by most seed houses of the period 
as an extra early. One grower reported that he was 
highly pleased with it as a variety for the amateur 
gardener, but that it was entirely unsuited for a market 
corn. 

Plant short, 3^1 feet; stalks slender. Ears borne low, shank 
short and slender. Dry ear short and slender, 4-6 x 1 ' £— 1 ' § inches; 
nearly cylindrical to slightly tapering; rows 8, straight, regular, 
usually somewhat paired at the base, showing rather wide fur- 
rows. Cob often tinged with red in the center. Kernels at dry 
stage whitish amber, wider than long; (121 seeds per oz. i; crown 
distinctly rounded; surface rather heavily wrinkled. 

Double-Barrelled Best. Ref. 499. Syn. Best Double- 
Barrelled. 

Arthur L. Richie of Riverton, New Jersey, was 
the originator of this sweet corn which was intro- 
duced in 1913 by Walter P. Stokes of Philadelphia. 
Mr. Richie, who was one of the leading sweet corn 
growers of Burlington County, had been a student at 
Cornell University and was much interested in plant 
breeding and variety improvement work. In 1906 on one 
field which was planted half to Stowell's Evergreen and 
half to a variety known locally as " Government Corn," 
he began the work which led to a new corn which was 
called Best Double-Barrelled. This name had been a 
slang expression of a farmer for whom Mr. Richie had 
once worked, and was used because of the large number 
of plants with two ears. 

The two parent varieties differed in size and thick- 
ness of ear but both were of the same maturity. The 
first season, 1906, just before cutting for market a 
large number of plants having two ears were topped, and 
saved for seed. Since sugar corn was always sold in 
the husk, Mr. Richie paid more attention to the exterior 
appearance of the ear. The field selections, however, 
were carefully culled at husking time. After seven 
years' work of selection toward uniformity of ear and 
two-eared stalks the variety was taken up by Mr. Stokes 
who reversed the name and introduced it as Double- 
Barrelled Best. During the decade following it became 
one of the most popular corns on the Philadelphia 
market. After 1926 it was not offered, the place it once 
occupied being taken by Sunnyslope Special. 

Durkee. Refs. 22, 90, 91, 274, 367, 368, 508, 509, 510. 
Syn. Durkee Sweet. 
Introduced by James J. H. Gregory in 1889, 
this variety was originated by Thomas C. Durkee 
of West Peabody, Massachusetts. It was a selec- 
tion from Crosby and had considerable local demand 
since it was like the parent in quality but a few days 
later in season. After 1893 it was dropped from listings 
as it differed but little from Crosby. 



32 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Dwarf Early. Refs. 14, 22, 59, 74, 90, 91, 308, 414, 422, 

428, 439, 503, 507, 508. Syns. Early Dwarf 

Sugar, Early Sweet Dwarf, Extra Early Dwarf, 

Extra Early Dwarf Sugar. 

This was one of the names applied to the early 

dwarf corn that came originally from an Indian source. 

It might even have been the early Papoon corn or a 

selection from it. Salisbury in 1848 named a small 

Early Sweet which was sometimes called Eight -rowed 

Early. Descriptions of these varieties as well as of 

Tom Thumb and Boynton show the type to be small 

eared and early. To a grower who criticised its size 

the editor of the Rural New Yorker in 1884 replied, 

" But we shall probably never find the earliest varieties 

with the largest ears." 

Plant short, 3 1 j— 4 feet, stalks slender; ears borne close to the 
ground; husked ear short and slender, 5-7 x 1 J 2 — 1 '' s inches, cyl- 
indrical or nearly so, more or less curved; rows 8, somewhat curved, 
regular. Kernels at milk stage white, small, shallow; at dry stage 
amber white, slightly wider than long (108 seeds per oz.), ovate 
in shape; crown rounded; surface wrinkled; set tightly on white cob. 

Since the name Dwarf Early, and the type it repre- 
sents is one of the very oldest among all the sweet corns, 
it is not out of the ordinary to find so many different 
name variations which have been associated with it. 
It is impossible to reconstruct the type as originally 
used or the selection from this type as offered in the 
earlier catalogs. A few of these old names have been 
given as synonyms of Dwarf Early. Naturally there 
are others about which we have been unable to collect 
much information. The following names were used 
previous to 1890, for slightly varying forms of Dwarf 
Early: Bates's Extra Early, Brill's Early Dwarf Sugar, 
Early White, Extra Early Sugar, Improved Extra 
Early White, Sweet or Sugar, and Sweet Sugar. 

Earliest. Refs. 34, 117, 345, 346, 348. 

This name might be associated with many early 
corns or given to strain selections of any one of several 
promising sorts. Beckert's Seed Store, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, offered Beckert's Earliest in 1923 and 
in 1932 Beckert's Earliest Improved. These have 
been in trials at Geneva and produced ears very similar 
to other early white corns such as Alpha, Early Denver 
or Early Fortune. The strain first introduced was 
described as with ears 6 to 7 inches long with 8 to 10 
rows of broad white kernels on a pinkish cob. Earliest 
Improved as grown at Geneva had ears with white 
cob and 10 to 12 rows of kernels. 

Earl} Vviator. Ref. 44. 

F. W. Bolgiano & Co. of Washington, D. C, 
sponsored this in 1928. In trials at Geneva it appeared 
to be a rather short eared early variety. It was last 
listed in the catalog of 1931, and as far as it is known 
has not been cataloged by any other company. 

Seventy-six days were required for this variety to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 1 day later 
than Alpha, 6 days later than Early Market, and 4 
days earlier than Whipple's Early. The plants are 
slightly taller than Early Market with tassel slightly 
longer, more slender and feathery. The ears are much 



the same as Early Market with tips not as rounded 
and dry kernels showing more white and less amber. 
Because of its similarity to the popular and meri- 
torious variety Early Market, it was not grown to any 
great extent. 

Early Boynton Sweet. Refs. 22, 90, 91, 137, 168, 422, 
430, 508, 535. Syns. Boynton, Boynton Early. 
This early dwarf corn was first listed by D. M. Ferry 
85 Co. in 1877. It was apparently developed by a Mr. 
Boynton who had grown the variety one or two years 
previous to 1877. It was a white cob sweet corn, short 
stalks without tillers; ears 8-rowed, small and rather 
pointed. Early Boynton was similar to Dwarf Early 
Sugar, Dolly Dutton, Tom Thumb and Early Min- 
nesota, and was probably selected from one of those or 
from the precursor of the group. 

Early Dakota. Refs. 335, 345, 554, 558. Syns. 
Dakota, Early Improved Dakota. 

Early Dakota was a selection from Mammoth 
White Cory and as such was offered by Oscar H. Will 
& Co. until about 1920. At that time a new stock 
which had proved to be an even more adequately 
adapted early white sweet corn was used. This new 
corn came from a rancher in Wyoming and had been 
called " Diamond S " after the name of the ranch. 
It had been grown there for some 15 years. Early 
Dakota corn has been one of the most successful 
varieties listed by Will since 1894 and is one of four 
leading white varieties recommended for North Dakota 
today. 

Eighty-two days were required for Early Dakota to 
produce ears at Geneva. This was 2 days later than 
Mammoth White Cory and in season with Early Ford- 
hook. The plants are 1 } 2-2 feet tallei than those of 
Mammoth White Cory, heavier and distinctly more 
zigzag. The husked ears are about the same length 
but somewhat more plump and average two more rows 
of slightly narrower kernels. 

Plant medium tall, 5J£-6 feet; stalks medium thickness and 
zigzag; nodes 8-9, exposed and prominent. Brace roots present, 
slender, whorl nearly complete on one node and useful. Tillers 
few to none, much shorter than central stalk. Tassel medium long 
and rather coarse, 16-18 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
horizontal, medium long, many present and moderately crowded; 
bracts and anthers variable. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two per 
stalk; medium long and moderately plump, 7-8 x 1 3 4~ 2 inches, 
distinctly tapering; base somewhat enlarged and compressed; tip 
conical and exposed, rows 12-14, nearly straight, slightly irregular 
and spiral. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size; at dry stage dull 
amber white, slightly longer than wide, medium thickness, 1.1 x 
.98 x .4 cm. 188 seeds per oz.); crown slightly rounded; surface 
abundantly and rather deeply wrinkled, often creased longitudinally; 
set somewhat loosely on cob. 

Early Dawn. Refs. 207, 208, 285, 345, 444. Syn. 
Dawn. 
The first variety to bear this name was that listed 
in 1892 by Johnson 6s Stokes, Philadelphia. They 
offered Early Dawn as the " largest eared white cobbed 
early sweet corn." The originator from whence the 
stock seed came was a gardener in northern Vermont. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



33 



A variety which would ripen seed in that northern 
latitude was of necessity early. By some it was believed 
to have been a selection for earliness from Stowell's 
Evergreen. The ears were large, often containing from 
16 to 24 rows, kernels large, plump, and with a minimum 
of shell or hull. In earliness it compared favorably with 
Early Crosby. After 1901 this strain disappeared. 

A sweet corn with the same name, Early Dawn, was 
offered in 1907 by S. M. Isbell & Co., Jackson, Michigan. 
This, however, was an 8-rowed sort with dwarf plant 
and ear with large wide kernels. Later this stock 
appeared as a 12 -rowed variety and now closely resembles 
Early Market. 

Early Dean. Refs. 22, 367, 368, 440, 441. 

Other than its mention in the Rural New-Yorker of 
1888 and 1889, little is known of this variety. Seed for 
planting in the trial grounds of the Rural New-Yorker 
had been secured from T. H. Hoskins of Newport, Ver- 
mont. In season it was very close to Cory and Marble- 
head but with taller plants, larger ears and much better 
quality. 

Early Denver. Ref. 551. 

The Western Seed Company, Denver, Colorado, 
first offered this corn in 1929. A Mr. Fred Bunger 
was given credit for originating this early sort. The 
plant was rather dwarf in habit, ears 6 to 7 inches long 
with 10 to 12 rows. Somewhat like Early Market. 

Early Dow. Ref. 321. Syn. Dow's Extra Early. 

This, one of the earliest white sweet corns in our 
trials, was named for George Dow, a Minnesota gardener. 
After many years of selection from Extra Early Cory, 
a small quantity of seed was secured by C. J. Lind- 
holm, Minneapolis, Minnesota, who introduced it in 
1920. The original Cory was popular because of its 
earliness but after some years there were many Cory 
stocks that had lost this character. Perhaps Dow 
was successful in finding a strain which was more like 
the original. 

Seventy-two days were required for this variety 
to reach edible maturity; 2 days later than Aroostock 
Early, 3 days earlier than Alpha and 16 days earlier 
than White Cory. The plants are 1-1 J •_> feet shorter 
than those of White Cory, are less inclined to tiller and 
have tassels that are decidedly shorter and possessing 
fewer laterals. The husks extend much less over the 
tip and are more loosely wrapped. The husked ears 
are 1-1} 2 inches shorter and have kernels that are 
broader for the depth than those of White Cory. Its 
utility lies in the fact that it is early. Some seasons 
it will come into production as early or earlier than 
any other variety, but the average season is as designated 
above. 

Plant short, 4— 4} i feet; stalks slender and zigzag; nodes 7-8, 
exposed and prominent, usually streaked with red at the base. 
Brace roots usually absent. Tillers few, slightly shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves short and moderately narrow, 20-25 x 3-3 '2 
inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassels moderately short 
and slender, 15-16 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
horizontal, medium long, simple, medium in number and not 



crowded; bracts variable in striping; anthers usually buff (deep 
colonial buff to chamois) ; 54-56 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and two ears per stalk 
with one usually a nubbin. Shank medium long and slender, 
4-5 inches. Husk leaves few, short and light. Husks few, short 
and rather loosely wrapped. Silk scanty, short and variable in 
color. Husked ear moderately short and slender, 5 ' _>-6 ' _, x 1 : jj 1 ' _> 
inches, moderately tapering; base enlarged and rather open; tip 
conical and exposed; rows 8, usually paired, moderately straight, 
somewhat irregular at the base; furrows deep and wide at the base 
but more narrow near the medial and tip. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, shallow; at dry 
stage dull amber white, broad as long, 1.0 x 1.1 x .38 cm. [ 96 seeds per 
oz.); short, oval in shape; crown rounded, often semicircular; surface 
coarsely and shallowly wrinkled; set moderately tight on cob. 

Early Essex. Refs. 222, 238, 241, 405, 567. Syns. 
Essex Sweet Early, New Early Essex. 
This variety, for a limited time, was quite popular 
with market gardeners of eastern Massachusetts. No 
record of the originator is available but it probably came 
from the town of Essex, Massachusetts, and it is possible 
that Aaron Low, a seedsman of that town, first developed 
it. It was first listed by S. D. Woodruff & Sons of 
Orange, Connecticut. James J. H. Gregory & Son of 
Marblehead, offered it as a novelty in 1903. In season it 
was as early as Quincy Market but with a larger and more 
coarse appearing ear. After a few years its place was 
taken by better varieties. 

Early Evergreen. Refs. 4, 40, 144, 238, 241, 329, 403, 
469, 515, 516, 517, 518, 562. Syns. Extra Early 
Evergreen, New Early Evergreen, Select Early 
Evergreen. Illus. 25. 

The name Early Evergreen rather than standing 
for a fixed type is used for a number of strains often differ- 
ing to a marked degree. As far as is known all of the 
various Early Evergreens were the result of selection 
for earliness from Stowell's Evergreen. At the time the 
first sweet corn bearing this name was introduced by 
Moore & Simon of Philadelphia, in 1896 there were other 
selections in existence v/hich had not been formerly 
introduced. 

Ferry's Early Evergreen was introduced by D. M. 
Ferry in 1898. Other strains which have become well 
established are Dobbin's Early Evergreen, Clark's Early 
Evergreen, Earle's Early Evergreen, Rice's Early Ever- 
green and Perry's New Early Evergreen. 

The name " Evergreen " has undoubtedly main- 
tained many pleasant associations among the con- 
sumers of sweet corn. It is natural to expect, then, that 
an earlier type of the well known Stowell's would find a 
place in the home and market garden. It is also used 
to some extent by the canning trade, although as with 
most white varieties, the demand for canned white corn 
is decreasing. 

At Geneva, edible ears were obtained in 92 days, 
6 days earlier than Stowell's Evergreen and 4 days later 
than Howling Mob. Plants are slightly taller than 
Stowell's Evergreen, with fewer tillers present but 
otherwise very much alike. The ears are borne on 
much shorter shanks than those of Stowell's Evergreen, 
while the husked ears are slightly shorter and more 
cylindrical. The kernels on the dry ear are straight 



34 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



across the crown instead of converging, often more 
regularly arranged in rows and less coarsely wrinkled 
and creased. 

There is undoubtedly more variation in strains of 
Early Evergreen than between strains of any other 
variety in common usage. Ferry's Early Evergreen pro- 
duces a shorter, less vigorous plant that quite consistently 
produces distinctly whitish green tassels that bear very 
bright yellow anthers. It, however, produces a short 
Stowell's Evergreen ear type with its characteristic con- 
verging crown to the dry kernels with coarse, deep wrink- 
ling and creasing. Earle's Early Evergreen is probably 
the most widely divergent of the types sold under this 
name. The ears are 7 to 9 inches long, possess 12 rows 
of kernels that are decidedly shorter than any other 
strain. Moreover, it produced edible ears in 88 days 
at Geneva, which was 4 days earlier than the type 
described. The type represented by C. S. Clark's Early 
Evergreen which is regarded as typical by the majority 
of seedsmen, is described below. 

Plant tall, 8-8) i feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
slightly exposed, not very prominent. Brace roots present, heavy, 
whorl complete on one node, useful. Tillers few, slightly shorter 
than central stalk. Leaves long and medium broad, 34-36 x 3 ' 2-4 
inches; sheath slightly shorter than internode. Tassel moderately 
long, 18-20 inches, heavy and coarse; terminal spike erect; lateral 
spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, medium long, many, 
crowded; bracts green, very slight to no red stripe present; anthers 
buff (deep colonial buff to chamois); 62-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one ear per stalk in addition 
to one nubbin present. Shank short and heavy, 2-3 inches. Husks 
moderately many, heavy, rather short and tightly wrapped, some- 
what difficult to remove. Silk moderately abundant, long and 
red. Husked ear medium long and plump, 7-8 x 2-2 1 . 4 inches, 
somewhat cylindrical to slightly tapering; base slightly enlarged 
and compressed; tip abruptly conical and slightly exposed; rows 
16-18, straight, slightly irregular at the base, crowded around the 
cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately large, medium width, 
deep; at dry stage opalescent white, decidedly longer than broad, 
rather thin, 1.3 x .78 x .33 cm. (112 seeds per oz.), rectangular; 
crown nearly straight across; surface very deeply creased and 
wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Early Fordhook. Refs. 74, 77, 97, 238, 240, 298, 328, 
329, 335, 345, 348, 382, 403, 404, 405, 453, 454, 
503, 513, 514, 546. Syns. Firstin, Fordhook. 

Introduced by W. Atlee Burpee Co. of Phila- 
delphia, this variety has been continued in present 
day catalogs of that company as the " earliest large 
white sweet corn." No information concerning its 
history, other than that it came from a grower in 
Connecticut, is available. When introduced it was 
one of many new varieties that were put forth as 
superior to Cory in one or more characters. Eariy 
Fordhook was advertised as earlier than Cory with a 
longer ear and deeper kernel. 

At Geneva Fordhook required 82 days to reach 
edible maturity. This was 3 days earlier than Ford's 
Early, in season with Adam's Early and 2 days later 
than Whipple's Early. Plants most resemble those of 
Ford's Early, being more slender and zigzag with tillers 
considerably shorter in proportion to the central stalk. 
The ear shanks are longer with husks shorter and more 



tightly wrapped. The husked ears are slightly shorter, 
more variable in the number of rows and contain kernels 
which, on the 8 rowed specimens at least, are noticeably 
broader. 

Plant medium tall, 5 s 4-6 feet; stalk moderately slender and 
slightly zigzag; nodes 8-9, exposed, somewhat prominent; exposed 
portions of internodes streaked with red. Brace roots occasionally 
present, not very useful. Tillers few, much shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves medium long and moderately narrow, 28-30 x 3 }.j-3 ' 2 
inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassel moderately long and 
slender, 18-20 inches; streaked with red at the base; terminal spike 
slightly drooping; lateral spikelets slightly drooping, moderately 
many, moderately long, and somewhat crowded; bracts and anthers 
quite variable in color; 58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank variable but usually 
6—9 inches long, tough. Husks rather short, tightly wrapped, 
heavy, not easily removed. Husked ear medium long and moder- 
ately slender, 7-8 x l'^-l^g inches, moderately tapering; base 
slightly expanded and open; tip long, conical, and slightly exposed; 
rows 8-10, very often paired, moderately straight; furrows on 8-row 
ears deep and wide at the base, not crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, large, broad and shallow; at dry 
stage dull white, very broad and medium long, 1.1 x 1.25 x .41 cm. 
(80 seeds per oz. ); broad, short oval in shape; crown rounded; 
surface abundantly but rather shallowly wrinkled, often coarse; 
set tightly on cob. 

Early Fortune. Refs. 41, 299. Syns. Early Harvester, 
Extra Early Fortune, Extra Early Harvester. 
This sweet corn was grown in trials at Geneva for 
several years, and as an early 8-rowed variety proved to 
be quite similar to Aroostock Early. Early Fortune has 
been listed since 1918 by the J. W. Jung Seed Co. of 
Randolph, Wisconsin, who accredit its origin to a 
Canadian source. These varieties represent a type 
which might well have been that of the original Malakoff 
but the instability of present stalks make the com- 
parison impossible. 

Early Hampshire. Ref. 55. 

Joseph Breck & Sons, Boston, secured this from a 
New Hampshire farmer who had selected it for earliness 
from Quincy Market. The variety therefore is similar to 
certain stocks of Crosby but a comparison of ears from 
these 3 varieties showed those of Early Hampshire to be 
larger. Breck first listed the variety in 1915 and for 
many years a considerable quantity of seed was sold to 
New England growers. White varieties today have very 
definitely lost their favored position in the Boston district 
and whereas in 1915 Breck listed 13 white varieties to 1 
yellow, in 1933 the ratio was changed to 6 white and 8 
yellow. This may account for the dropping of many very 
excellent white varieties, among them Early Hampshire, 
which was last offered in 1927. 

Early Iowa. Refs. 133, 541. 

Vaughan's Seed Store offered Early Iowa in 1909 as 
the earliest real sweet corn of marketable size. The origi- 
nator, W. B. Perry of Cresco, Iowa, claimed to have 
crossed Perry's Hybrid and Salzer's Northern Pedigree 
nearly 50 years ago. The stock was kept in his posses- 
sion until discovered by Vaughan. Pictures show that it 
was an 8-rowed ear, about as large as Cory. In earliness 
it was within 2 days of Malakhoff and a week earlier 
than Cory. Vaughan carried this variety until 1924. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



35 



Earl) June. Refs. 234, 242, 334, 335, 345, 413, 555. 
Syn. Early July. 

For the Northwest and the northern Great Plains 
area this is reputedly the earliest known variety. Early 
June was first secured by Oscar H. Will from Robert 
Holmes of Anoka, Minnesota. It had been selected 
on the basis of earliness for 6 or 7 years using Peep 
O'Day for comparison. The trials in North Dakota 
justified the claim to earliness and it was introduced 
in 1900. This was the same year that Peep O'Day 
was introduced, and it is possible that these two 
varieties had a common origin, possibly White Cob 
Cory, although they are both earlier and smaller eared. 

At Geneva this variety produced edible ears in 
75 days, in season with Alpha, 3 days later than Early 
Dow, and 3 days earlier than Honey Dew. The plants 
are slightly shorter than those of Alpha, inclined to 
tiller more but otherwise are very much alike. The 
greatest difference exists in the ears which are slightly 
more slender, consistently shorter, more cylindrical and 
more completely capped at the apex. It was developed 
to more adequately suit the short growing season in 
the northern plains area where its earliness meant 
much to the home gardener. In other sections it has 
little significance because cf its small size. 

Plant short, 3-3 ' ■> feet; stalk moderately straight and slender; 
nodes 6-8, not prominent. Brace roots absent. Tillers few, equal 
in height to central stalk. Leaves short and narrow, 22-24 x 2 ! 2 _ 3 
inches; sheath equal to and very often shorter than internode. 
Tassel short and very slender, 12-15 inches; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets nearly erect, few, short and moderately crowded; 
bracts dark green, quite heavily striped with red; anthers buff 
colored I deep colonial buff to chamois); 55-58 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Shank moderately short, 2-3 
inches, slender and brittle. Husks moderately many, medium 
heavy, rather loosely wrapped and easily removed. Silk pale red, 
scanty, short and easily removed. Husked ear moderately short 
and slender, 5-6 x l?g-l)2 inches, moderately tapering; base 
slightly enlarged and moderately compressed; tip conical and 
usually capped: rows 8, rather straight, occasionally somewhat 
irregular and spiral at the base. 

Kernels at the milk stage white; small, shallow and medium 
width: at dry stage dull white, thin, short and medium width, 
.97 x 1.15 x .34 cm. 1132 seeds per oz.); short triangular in shape; 
crown slightly rounded; surface rather coarsely and sparsely 
wrinkled: set tightly on cob. 

Early Leach. Refs. 345, 564. 

F. H. Woodruff & Sons, Milford, Connecticut, 
introduced Early Leach in 1926 and continued to list 
it until 1929 as an early variety superior to their Early 
Wonder. Magruder at Ohio had this variety in trial 
grounds in 1929 and it was also grown at Geneva the 
same year. 

Plant moderately short, 4— 4.' •> feet tall; stalks slender and 
zigzag; tillers moderately many; tassels short and erect. Ears 
borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, often 2 per stalk; husked ears moderately 
short and medium plump, 6-7 x l 1 _.— 1 ■' _j inches, moderately taper- 
ing; rowr 8-12, mostly 8; furrows often prominent; kernels at milk 
stage deep creamy white; rather wide and shallow; at dry stage 
pale reddish bronze, medium size; set tightly on red cob. 

Early Malcolm. Refs. 27, 330, 331, 332, 334, 335, 
465. 498. 
Early Malcolm is a sweet corn originating from 
the Early Malakhoff which was brought to the United 



States and Canada many years ago from Russia. 
The selection work by Dr. W. T. Macoun and 
Arthur J. Logsdail was conducted at the Central 
Experimental Farm, Ottawa, Canada, for upwards 
of 30 years. This variety has served a useful pur- 
pose in advancing the season of sweet corn in all the 
Provinces of Canada, being 8 to 10 days earlier than 
Golden Bantam. Early Malcolm has been grown in 
every Province in Canada and while it has not been a 
total success as far north as has Pickaninny, yet prior 
to the appearance of Pickaninny it was looked upon as 
one of the best, hardy, early maturing varieties. It was 
introduced to growers in the United States in 1920 by 
Stokes Seed Farms Co., Moorestown, New Jersey, who 
continued to list the variety until 1929. 

Seventy-seven days were required for this variety 
to produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 11 days 
earlier than Banana Cream, 5 days later than Early 
Dow, and 2 days later than Alpha. The plants are 
about the same height as those of Banana Cream, with 
decidedly less tendency to tiller and having tassels 
about the same length but containing many more lateral 
spikelets. The husked ears closely resemble those of 
Banana Cream in uniformity of kernel size and regu- 
larity of arrangement. In the dry stage, the kernels 
are much wider in proportion to the length than 
were those of Banana Cream. This is another of 
the white varieties indigenous to the more northern 
areas where its comparative earliness is its chief value. 
It is net widely grown at the present time due largely 
to the increase in the number of early yellow varieties 
that are meeting with greater approval. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5*2 feet; stalks slender and slightly 
zigzag; nodes 6-8, exposed, prominent. Brace roots usually absent. 
Tillers few, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves short and 
moderately narrow, 23-25 x 3-3 '2 inches; sheath shorter than 
internode. Tassel short and slender, 12-15 inches; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, short, many present, crowded 
and branched at the base; bracts green, very sparsely striped with 
pale red; anthers usually buff (deep colonial buff to chamois); 
54-56 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one nubbin usually present. Shank moderately long 
and slender, 5-6 inches, brittle. Husk leaves many, medium long 
and moderately heavy. Husks moderately few, rather short and 
tightly wrapped, difficult to remove. Husked ear moderately short 
and slender, 6 1 y- 7' 2 x 1 1 2 — 1 ^ 1 inches, moderately tapering; base 
slightly enlarged and compressed; tip long conical and very slightly 
exposed; rows 10-12, straight and regular, crowded around the 
cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather small, medium width and 
shallow; at dry stage amber white, wider than long, medium thick, 
.88 x 1.07 x .4 cm. 1104 seeds per oz.); short broad oval in shape; 
crown semi-circular; surface very sparsely and shallowly wrinkled, 
often nearly smooth; set tightly on cob. 

Early Mammoth. Refs. 22, 73, 74, 89, 90, 91, 93, 120, 

126, 223, 238, 266, 376, 397, 403, 404, 405, 498, 

508, 516, 537. Syns. Early Mammoth Sugar, 

Top Notch. 

Early Mammoth as a type has persisted since 

its introduction in 1890 by D. Landreth & Sons, 

Philadelphia. Although the variety has been in exist- 

1 ence for over 40 years, it has never been very popu- 



36 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



larly received. The name has been used with several 
other sweet corns as in early catalogs of C. C. Morse 
& Co. where Early Mammoth appears with Alameda. 
Gregory in 1906 listed Early Mammoth, the " King 
of the Earlies." with the description " ripens just 
about with the Crosby and resembles it in number 
of rows, 12 to 16, in shape of kernels, and sweetness, 
but grows to average half as large again." This strain 
of Gregory's originated as a spcrt in a field of original 
Crosby. 

The Early Mammoth which first appeared was 
described as a long slim eared variety with ears 7 to 9 
inches long, 10 to 12 rows and a few days earlier than 
Late Mammoth. The ears of present day stock, how- 
ever, will average slightly longer with 2-4 more rows. 
Early Mammoth produced edible ears at Geneva in 97 
days, about the same season as Stowell's Evergreen 
and 3 days earlier than Mammoth. Plants are equal 
in height to those of Mammoth, possess longer inter- 
nodes and are more inclined to tiller. The husked 
ears are of equal length but those of Early Mammoth are 
more slender and have fewer rows, likewise the kernels 
when dry are somewhat smaller, decidedly less thick 
and generally more attractive. 

Plant tall, 7 , _^8 feet; stalk moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 10-12, usually exposed and prominent. Brace roots present, 
rather heavy, whorl complete on one node, useful. Tillers many, 
equal to and slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves long and 
medium broad, 34—36 x 3 3 4 — 4- inches; sheath shorter than internode. 
Tassel long, 20-22 inches, somewhat heavy and coarse; terminal 
spike nearly erect; lateral spikelets moderately erect to slightly 
drooping, medium long, many, multi-branched and rather crowded; 
bracts green, slight to no red stripe present; anthers buff deep 
colonial buff to chamois) ; 70-72 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and occasionally two 
large ears per stalk. Shank rather long, 5—6 inches, moderately 
heavy. Husks many, rather heavy, short, tightly wrapped but 
moderately easy to remove. Husked ear long and moderately 
plump, 9-10 x 1 3 4— 2 inches; moderately to decidedly tapering; 
base enlarged, somewhat expanded; tip abruptly conical and often 
capped, occasionally exposed; rows 12-16, moderately straight, 
slightly irregular at the base, somewhat crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather small, medium width and 
moderately short; at dry stage pale amber white, somewhat longer 
than wide, medium thickness, 1.1 x .93 x .36 cm. 108 seeds per 
oz.); triangular; crown slightly rounded; surface rather abundantly 
but shallowly and coarsely wrinkled; set moderately loose on cob. 

Early Market. Refs. 21, 102, 112, 121, 204, 227, 335, 
345, 346, 348, 367, 478, 518. 548. Syns. Early 
White Market, Extra Early Market, New Sixty- 
Day, Sixty-Day Make Good. Illus. 25, 31. 
This selection from Gill's Portland Market intro- 
duced by Gill Brcs. Seed Co. of Portland, Oregon, 
in 1913, has risen to a prominent position among white 
sweet corn varieties. The name Early Market is in 
itself a happy choice, for growers are always on the 
watch for a variety combining earliness with other 
qualities that make it acceptable for a market sort. 
Earl}- Market came indirectly from Mammoth White 
Cory. Selections were made by successive stages 
from that variety leading to the introduction of Oak- 
view Early Market in 1901, Portland Market in 1910, 
and Early Market in 1913. 



At Geneva edible ears were produced in 70 days, 
5 days earlier than Alpha, in season with Arocstock 
Early and 10 days earlier than Mammoth White Cory. 
The plants are about the same height and vigor as those 
of Aroostock Early with sheaths decidedly shorter than 
the internodes. The ears are borne at the same height, 
hang at a more obtuse angle from the stalk, and have 
shanks which are decidedly shorter. The husked ears 
are much more plump, contain 2-4 more rows, and are 
definitely more rounded at the tip. 

Early Market is widely grown in the East, the 
Middlewest and the Northwest as a favorite white 
market garden sort. It remains in a class by itself as 
the largest eared, extra early, white variety now grown. 
Were it not fcr the retardation of all white varieties in 
favor of the yellows, it seems highly probable that it 
would have assumed the place of importance in this 
generation that Cory and later Mammoth White Cory did 
in the preceding one. 

Plant short, S^—t 1 - feet; stalks slender and straight; nodes 
7-8, usually exposed and prominent. Brace roots usually not 
present. Tillers few to none, much shorter than central stalk. 
Leaves moderately short and moderately narrow, 20-25 x 3-3 'j 
inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassel moderately short 
and slender, 14—16 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
nearly erect, relatively few, somewhat crowded; bracts green, 
moderately striped with red; anthers reddish bronze vterra cotta to 
vinaceous russet i; 53-55 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk, with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Shank very short, 1 ! _<— 2 inches, 
moderately heavy and brittle. Husks many, moderately thick, 
short, tightly wrapped and fairly easy to remove. Silk scanty, 
short, quite uniformly red. Husked ear moderately short and 
plump, 6-7 x 2— 2J^ inches, partly cylindrical and moderately 
tapering; rows 12-14, regular, straight and crowded around the 
cob; base slightly enlarged, moderately compressed; tip rounded 
to abruptly conical. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately broad, short and 
medium thick; at dry stage creamy white, medium size, moderately 
short and broad, .9 x 1.15 x .45 cm. 100 seeds per oz. ; nearly 
square in shape; crown slightly rounded: surface rather sparsely 
and coarsely wrinkled; set moderately tight on cob. 

Early Michigan. Ref. 296. 

As a promising sweet corn for canning this strain 
new to Michigan growers was brought from Maine 
by the Roach Canning Co. of Hart, Michigan. The 
Jones Seed Co. of Grand Rapids. Michigan, were 
impressed with the high quality and uniformity of 
the stock and introduced it in 1913 as Early Michigan. 
In many respects Early Michigan resembled Crosby 
and was very probably a selection for earliness frcm 
that variety. 

Early Minnesota. Refs. 22, 48. 61, 73, 74, 89, 91, 93, 

120, 121, 123, 126, 137, 170, 200, 236, 238, 240, 

241, 243, 278, 298, 335, 397, 403, 404, 405, 407, 

408, 410, 411, 422, 423, 425, 427, 440, 487, 503, 

507,508,510,511, 512.514. 516.517,525,532, 533, 

535, 536, 537, 538, 544. 546. Syns. Early Sweet 

Minnesota, Extra Early Minnesota, Minnesota. 

The position of leadership among varieties of 

sweet corn held by Early Minnesota during the years 

1875 to 1890 was comparable to that held by Cory 

in the succeeding decade, 1890 to 1900. It was con- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



37 



sidered the best of the early sweet corns and all other 
varieties were compared with it before they were 
accepted as worthy additions to the growing list. Early 
Minnesota was first listed about 1871 by Grant Thcr- 
burn and by Gregory and soon after by practically 
all seed houses. No record of the origin of this variety 
has been located although it was said to have been a selec- 
tion from Narragansett. The variety has apparently 
been continued to the present day in much the same form 
as originally listed. 

Eighty-four days were required for this variety 
to reach edible maturity at Geneva. This was 4 days 
earlier than Howling Mob. 1 week earlier than Lyman's 
Pride, and in season with Peep O'Day. The plants are 
1 1 ' _> feet shorter than those of Howling Mob, some- 
what more slender, have less tendency to tiller but are 
practically identical in tassel characteristics. The 
husked ears are decidedly more slender than Howling 
Mob, and resemble those of Lyman's Pride in size, 
shape and kernels more closely than any other variety. 
The plant characters of the latter are very different, 
however, and serve as distinguishing features between 
these sorts. 

Early Minnesota is one of the oldest varieties now 
grown. It has been used in many crosses both accidental 
and controlled so that its value insofar as breeding is 
concerned is recognized by the trade. Its uniformity 
and attractiveness of ear coupled with more than 
ordinary quality has given it the reputation associated 
with it. 

Plant medium tall, 5—5 ] 2 feet ; stalks slender and slightly 
zigzag: nodes 8-9, covered, not prominent; internodes slightly 
streaked with red on exposed portions. Tillers few, nearly as tall 
as central stalk. Leaves moderately long and moderately narrow, 
30-32 x 3-3 ' j inches: sheath longer than internode, often streaked 
with red. Tassel moderately long and slender, 18-20 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spiklets drooping, many, long, multi- 
branched, moderately crowded; bracts green, rather sparsely striped 
with light red: anthers usually yellowish buff (deep colonial buff 
to chamois), 63-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank variable in length, 3-6 inches. Husks few, 
rather short, light, tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and 
slender, 7-8 x 1 3 ,-1;\ inches, nearly cylindrical to slightly tapering; 
base somewhat open; tip conical, slightly exposed to capped; rows 
8, distinctly paired, usually straight, somewhat irregular near base; 
furrows deep and moderately narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, distinctly wide, rather shallow; 
at dry stage dull white, medium size, much wider than long, short 
and medium thick, .93 x 1.17 x .41 cm. 112 seeds per oz. : short 
broad oval in shape; crown rounded; surface rather coarsely yet 
abundantly wrinkled, often deeply ridged and irregular; set moder- 
ately tight on cob. 

Early Pearl. Ref. 251. Syn. Pearl. 

From Calvin Crossman of New Milford, Con- 
necticut, we obtained the story of Early Pearl, a variety 
practically identical to Cupid, which was introduced 
by the Chas. C. Hart Seed Co., of Wethersfield, Con- 
necticut. Some 20 years ago a Mr. Marsh of that 
town was spending the winter in Orange City, Florida. 
He became acquainted with a market gardener from 
New Jersey, and as one good farmer to another, the 
conversation led to a discussion of the merits of Golden 



Bantam corn. The farmer from New Jersey admitted 
the good qualities of Golden Bantam but had one 
better, a sweeter, more tender white sort called Pearl. 
Mr. Marsh secured 60 kernels of this new corn, brought 
it home to Connecticut and passed a few seed around 
to his neighbors. Most of the plantings resulted in 
failure but the seed planted by Mr. Crossman did 
well and under his guidance the stock increased from 
year to year until M. H. Mallett, hardware dealer 
and local seedsman, disposed of several bushels locally 
every year. From Mr. Mallett the Chas. C. Hart Co. 
secured seed and offered it in their catalogs for 1932. 
Early Pearl produced edible ears at Geneva in 84 
days, 4 days later than Cupid or Sugarsweet. The 
plants are 1-1} L > feet taller and are much more productive. 
The tassel type, ear and kernel characters are, however, 
very similar. The description of Cupid can, with the 
exceptions noted in this account, be considered appli- 
cable to Early Pearl. Its attractiveness and relative 
high production of small but good quality ears warrants 
further consideration of this variety. Reports from 
trials at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment 
Station, moreover, serve to verify our conclusions. 

Early Rose. Refs. 178, 533. 

This sweet corn, new in 1907, came originally 
from G. H. Cummings, the originator of White Mexican. 
Henry Field Seed Co., Shenandoah, Iowa, first listed 
the variety and featured it for the next five years 
after which it was dropped because of the difficulty 
in retaining seed true to type. Its chief character- 
istic, a light rose color of the seed when ripe, dis- 
tinguished this variety from any other sort. As a 
type it resembled the Evergreen group but was in and 
gone before any other evergreen was ready. 

J. Steckler Seed Co. of New Orleans, Louisiana, in 
1910 offered a variety called First In The Market Sugar. 
This was early and had ears larger than those of Crosby 
with " kernels of a pale pinkish color, some of the ears 
run entirely white while others again are of a deep pink." 
This might have been similar to Early Rose, but since 
both varieties soon disappeared from the trade, no 
direct comparison could be made. 

Early Saskatchewan. Refs. 70, 348. 

Introduced in 1927 by the Burgess Seed and Plant 
Company, Galesburg, Michigan, this variety has pro- 
duced very uniform and attractive ears in the trials at 
Geneva. No information is available concerning its 
origin, and apparently it has not been cataloged by any- 
one other than the introducer. By comparison Early 
Saskatchewan has proved to be much like Banana Cream, 
with the husked ears much alike in shape, size and kernels. 
The plants, however, were more variable, some consider- 
ably taller and produced its crop 5 to 6 days later. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 ] 2 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
slightly zigzag; tillers many, equal to central stalk in height: tassel 
medium long and slender, 16-18 inches with laterals distinctly long 
and horizontal. Husked ears medium long and moderately slender, 
7-8 x l'^-l^s inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering; rows 12, 
straight and crowded around the cob; kernels at milk stage white, 
small, rather narrow and shallow. 



38 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Early Southern Sweet. Refs. 22, 90, 91, 169, 508, 
511, 535, 536. Syns. Early Southern, Southern. 
This variety was a true hybrid corn, being the result 
of crossing Minnesota on the " Cuzco, a Mexican species 
with very tall stalks and short, thick ears, bearing grains 
as large as chestnuts." D. M. Ferry & Co. made the 
cross in 1832 and after selecting for 6 years introduced it 
in 1888. The plants were like Minnesota in size with 
stiff broad foliage, and bearing medium length 10-rowed 
ears covered with thick, coarse husks. The grain was 
large with a rather thick skin, but sweet and good. 

Earl} Sugar, Livingston's. Ref. 325. Syn. "Early 
Sugar". 

This is a variety which was introduced in 1911 
by the Livingston Seed Co., Columbus, Ohio. Although 
the introducing company have continued it as a leading 
variety, it has not been generally listed by the trade, at 
least under the name Early Sugar. Although listed as 
an addition to the early sweet corns. Early Sugar on the 
basis of its performance at Geneva belongs in the 
midseason group, having required on the average of 92 
days to reach edible maturity. In the uniformity, 
attractiveness and color of the ears it much resembles 
those of Burpee's Branching. However, the lack of the 
bushy habit of the plants due to lessened tendency to 
tiller serves to partially distinguish the two. 

The outstanding characteristics of the variety seem to be the 
vigor of the plant which at Geneva was tall, 6 ' _>-7 \ _, feet with heavy 
stalk with few to no tillers present. The husked ear was medium 
long and medium plump, 7-8 x l 5 s - l 3 4. moderately tapering, and 
occasionally capped at the tip. The 12-14 rows of kernels were 
rather small and shallow, very attractive, while the kernels in the 
dry stage were distinctly opalescent white in color. 

Early Sunrise. Refs. 64, 207, 208, 238, 241, 280, 348, 
406. Syns. New Early Sunrise, Sunrise, White 
Sunrise. 
The Iowa Seed Co., Des Moines, Iowa, intro- 
duced this variety in 1899 and has featured it con- 
tinuously. H. W. Buckbee, Rockford, Illinois, in 
1901 offered a prize of SI 00 for the best name sent in and 
accepted for a remarkable new sweet corn variety. The 
next year, 1902, this was announced as Buckbee's Earlj- 
" Sunrise " sweet corn. According to the catalogs of the 
Iowa Seed Co., this sort originated with a farmer in 
western Iowa who had perfected it by 8 years selection. 
As grown at Geneva it was a midseason variety in 
season with Peep O'Day, Early Minnesota, Early 
Fordhook, and Vanguard. The plant was rather tall, 
about 6 feet, slender, with a light feathery' tassel, and 
ears 6 inches long, 10 to 12-rowed with a small white 
cob. 

Earlj Sweet. Refs. 36, 89, 91, 167, 207, 208, 410, 418, 
507, 508. 514. 535, 536. Syn. Early Sugar. 
D. M. Ferry & Co. introduced Early Sweet or Sugar 
in 1875 or thereabouts and it has remained continuously 
in the catalogs of Ferry and the succeeding company. 
Ferry-Morse. The early descriptions of the variety 
are not wholly in agreement as to the length of ear but 
after 1895 the type seems to have been rather definitely 



fixed as a long, slender, 7'o to 9-inch eared variety. 
The name Early Sweet was also used for the variety 
better known as Dwarf Early as well as for others of its 
group, but since these varieties are no longer popular 
there is now no conflicting use of name. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 87 days, 
about the same season as Howling Mob, 5 days later 
than Independence and 3 days earlier than Mimms' 
Hybrid. The variety most resembles Independence 
with plants the same height and vigor, similar feathery 
tassels but with anthers more consistently striped with 
red. The husked ears are 2-3 inches longer, slightly 
more tapering, and capped at the tip; otherwise are 
much the same. The attractiveness of a long, regular 
8 -rowed sweet corn is well brought out in this variety. 
To those who have desired a delicate ear with all sug- 
gestion of the colossal absent, this sort has been offered. 
Because of these characters it has been confined to 
planting in the home and market garden. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 ' 2 feet; stalks very slender and 
slightly zigzag; nodes 7-8, slightly exposed, moderately prominent; 
internodes streaked with red on exposed portions. Tillers few, much 
shorter than central stalk. Leaves medium long and moderately 
narrow, 30—32 x 3J£— 3J^ inches; sheath equal to and occasionally 
shorter than internode. Tassel moderately long and slender, rather 
feathery, 18-20 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
horizontal to slightly drooping, moderately many, long and some- 
what crowded; bracts and anthers variable in color; 60-62 days to 
anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank medium long and 
slender, 3-5 inches. Husks few, rather light, medium length and 
moderately tight wrapped. Husked ear long and slender, 8-10 x 
l}4— lj^ inches, nearly cylindrical and slightly tapering; base com- 
pressed and occasionally open; tip long conical and occasionally 
capped; rows 8, straight, usually paired, with furrows deep but very 
narrow, not prominent. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, moderately broad 
and shallow; at dry stage small, wider than long, very thick, .88 x 
1.0 x .45 cm. (124 seeds per oz.); decidedly short oval in shape; 
crown rounded; surface rather sparsely and shallowly wrinkled: 
set tightly on cob. 

Early Vermont. Refs. 77, 121, 207, 208, 450, 454, 
513, 514. Syn. Extra Early Vermont. 
No early sweet corn introduced during the " gay 
nineties " survived even its baptismal season uniess 
its sponsors were able to show its superiority to Cory. 
Cory earliness, Cory quality, became the measuring 
stick for varieties in this class, and like all winners, 
it seems as though every seed company aspired to 
be the sponsor cf that new corn which would dethrone 
the great Cory. Naturally in this competitive rivalry 
many varieties were introduced that had no greater 
points of divergence than the difference in the vocabu- 
laries of the catalog writers striving to transfer stocks 
of seed from warehouse to grower. And so Early 
Vermont " the market man's money maker," " the 
pride of the home garden." " the epicure's delight," 
was launched in 1894 by Frank Ford & Son of Ravenna, 
Ohio, and Vaughan's Seed Store of New York. For 
a few years Early Vermont was quite popular as 
measured by the number of other companies which 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



39 



featured it in catalog descriptions. It was supposed 
to have come as the result of a cross between a late 
and an early variety. The cob was white, ear 6 to 
8 inches long, 8-rowed with very large white grains. 
At the time of its introduction it was given as earlier 
than Con - and Pride of America but 2 years later it 
was listed as later than Cory, Fordhook Early or First 
of All. 

Early Wonder. Refs. 231, 345. 348, 483. Syn. Extra 
Early Wonder. 

I. N. Simon & Son. Philadelphia, introduced 
Early Wonder in 1913 as a sweet corn which is " truly 
a wonder." The name " Wonder " has been used 
in connection with other sweet corns, among them 
the New Early Wonder in 1910 by Henry Phillips, 
Toledo, Ohio, and Early White Wonder in 1913 by A. C. 
Kendel, Cleveland, Ohio. Comstock, Ferre & Co. have 
a stock of Early Wonder which came to them along 
with other material from the Thomas Griswold Co. 

The history of Early Wonder is unknown although 
it is thought by some to have come as a selection from 
Columbia. The plantings of this variety at Geneva 
have been grown from seed from Simon and Comstock, 
Ferre, so that the data for the description of Early 
Wonder is based on these stocks. 

Eighty days were required for this variety to reach 
edible maturity at Geneva. This was 3 days later 
than Surprise, in season with Whipple's Early and 
Mammoth White Cory, and 5 days later than Alpha. 
The plants are 1 J £ feet taller than those of Surprise, 
having tillers considerably taller in proportion to the 
central stalk and more variable in bract and anther 
color. The husked ears are 1 to 2 inches longer than those 
of Surprise, slightly more conical and more often exposed 
at the tip. Likewise the kernels at the dry stage are 
somewhat longer in proportion to the width. This is 
another one in the medium early class of white sweet 
com that has been used in the market garden sections 
of the East and Middlewest. 

Plant moderately tall, 6 feet; stalks moderately slender and 
straight; nodes 8-9, exposed, prominent. Brace roots present, 
moderately heavy, whorl nearly complete, somewhat useful. Tillers 
few, equal in height to central stalk. Leaves moderately long and 
medium broad, 32-34 x 3 3 4 ^ ] 2 inches; sheath shorter than inter- 
node. Tassel medium long, 15—18 inches, slender; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, medium long, moderately many, 
rather scattered, multi-branched; bracts and anthers variable; 
60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk, otherwise an occasional nubbin present. Shank medium 
long, 4-5 inches, rather heavy. Husk leaves rather short and 
heavy. Husks moderately many, heavy, medium length, rather 
loosely wrapped and easily removed. Husked ear medium long 
and moderately plump, 7-8 x l 3 4 -2 inches, slightly tapering, 
attractive; base slightly enlarged; tip conical and very slightly 
exposed; rows 10-12, moderately straight, slightly irregular at the 
base, occasionally lost. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather large, broad and medium 
depth; at dry stage dull amber white, longer than wide, 1.17 x .94 
x. 39 cm. 115 seeds per oz. ; triangular ; crown very slightly rounded : 
surface shallowly and rather coarsely wrinkled; set moderately 
tight on cob. 



Eastman's Early. Refs. 108, 238. Syn. Eastern Extra 

Early. 
This variety was first offered by the Eastman Seed 
Company, East Sumner, Maine, sometime prior to 1898. 
A test of 41 varieties at the New Hampshire Experiment 
Station substantiated the claim of the introducer as being 
the earliest of any sweet corn. The strain was originated 
by a Mr. Eastman of Maine. The ears were 6 to 7 
inches long, 8 to 12 rows, slightly earlier than Peep 
O'Day. It was very similar to First of All (Dreer). 

Egyptian. Refs. 22, 61, 73, 74, 75, 89, 91, 93, 121, 
168, 214, 236, 238, 368, 397, 403, 405, 411, 412, 
422, 423, 435, 464, 487, 503, 507, 508, 511, 512, 
514, 515, 533, 535, 536, 537, 538, 545. Syns. 
Early Egyptian, Egyptian Sugar, Egyptian Sweet, 
Large Egyptian, New Egyptian, Washington, 
Washington Market. 
Whatever the origin of this sweet corn refer- 
ences to early catalogs show that it was generally 
carried by the larger seed houses beginning about 1880. 
In 1883 both Gregory and Ferry considered it noteworthy 
for productiveness and sweetness. Gregory gives the 
credit for its introduction to a Mr. Hyde as it was once 
known as Hyde's Egyptian. Descriptions show a late 
variety maturing with Stowell's Evergreen and resem- 
bling that variety in many respects but with kernels 
wider and shallower. 

At Geneva 98 days were required for edible ears 
to be produced. This was in season with Stowell's 
Evergreen, 3 days later than Henderson and 1 day 
later than New Wonder. The plants are much like 
those of New Wonder. The tassel bracts are decidedly 
less striped with red, often entirely absent in comparison 
to those of Stowell's Evergreen, while the general foliage 
color is somewhat lighter green. The ears are borne 
slightly lower on the stalk than those of New Wonder, 
and are decidedly less numerous. The husks are longer, 
but just as tightly wrapped and difficult to remove. 
The husked ears are about the same length but decidedly 
more plump. In the dry stage the kernels are set more 
loosely on the cob. This old variety was used princi- 
pally as a canning sort, and as such was widely grown, 
particularly in the East, the Middlewest, and in the 
region of the Great Lakes. 

The description to follow is based on data obtained 
from the few stocks still available. Consequently 
some deviation may exist in comparison to the original 
Egyptian. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
nearly covered, not very prominent. Brace roots present, heavy, 
complete on one node and part of another, useful. Tillers few to 
none, slightly shorter than central stalk, leaves long and medium 
width, 34-36 x 3-^- inches; sheath equal to and occasionally longer 
than internode. Tassel moderately long, 18-20 inches, coarse 
and heavy, occasionally colored at the base; terminal spike erect, 
lateral spikelets moderately erect to slightly drooping, medium 
length, rather numerous and crowded; bracts green, very slight to 
no red stripe present; anthers buff deep colonial buff to chamois ; 
74—76 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne high, at 6th and 7th nodes, one and often two ears 
per stalk with an occasional nubbin also present. Husk leaves few, 



40 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



short and light. Husks many, long, rather light but tightly wrapped, 
particularly about the tip, difficult to remove. Silk moderately 
long, abundant and red in color. Husked ear moderately long and 
moderately plump, 8-9 x 1J&-2 inches, moderately tapering; base 
somewhat enlarged but compressed; tip conical and slightly exposed; 
rows 14-16, moderately straight, occasionally lost at the medial, 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, narrow and short; at dry 
stage opalescent white, much longer than broad, 1.1 x .78 x .39 cm. 
1,164 seeds per oz.); triangular; crown nearly straight; surface rather 
sparsely and shallowly wrinkled; set rather loosely on cob. 

Eight-Rowed. Refs. 13, 22, 59, 65, 73, 89, 90, 91, 93, 
173, 207, 208, 214, 364, 397, 405, 406, 414, 417, 
427, 428, 482, 503, 507, 508, 514, 533, 536, 537, 
552. Syns. Brigg's Early Sweet, Earliest Large, 
Early Eight-Rowed, Early Eight-Rowed Sugar, 
Early Large Eight-Rowed, Eight-Rowed Sugar, 
Large Eight-Rowed Sugar, Late Eight-Rowed, 
Mammoth Sweet Eight-Rowed, New England, 
New England 8-Rowed, New England Eight- 
Rowed Early, New England Sugar, New England 
Sweet, North Pole, Rochester, Rochester Eight- 
Rowed. 
When only one variety existed to represent any one of 
the separate types the name chosen for that variety could 
well have been a name that in itself expressed some 
characteristic of the variety. Thus Eight-Rowed Early 
signified an early variety with 8-rowed ears. When the 
word Dwarf was added to this then it of course became 
dwarf, early and 8-rowed. Likewise the words sweet 
or sugar appended to a name indicated that the variety 
was particularly noted for this quality. Eight-Rowed 
was offered in the catalogs of the early seed merchants 
with all the possible combinations of these descriptive 
adjectives. 

As the number of varieties grew and as selections 
made on the basis of minor differences in plant or ear 
were offered it became more and more difficult to arrange 
these few words in the name so as to indicate the actual 
differences. In a relatively short period there were 
perhaps 5 to 10 strains that came under the general 
classification of 8-rowed each presumably separated by 
the terms early, dwarf, late, large, sweet, etc. Eventu- 
ally these qualifying words fell into disuse which led 
to the removal of the name Eight-Rowed from catalog 
use, inasmuch that it did not sufficiently separate one 
8-rowed variety from another. 

Eight-Rowed as such was first listed about 1867. 
Sturtevant writes in the report of 1884, " very likely 
the sweet or sugar of Bridgeman, 1832, and the Eight - 
Rowed Sugar of Schenck, 1854." All available descrip- 
tions of this variety very strongly indicate that, although 
the word early was used, it reached edible maturity 
in New York State anywhere from 86 to 93 days and 
produced vigorous plants with long ears. The descrip- 
tion to follow represents a compilation of Sturtevant's 
work with that of Burrill and McClure. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7} 2 feet or more, stalks rather 
slender, tillers few; tassel slender and drooping. Ears borne 20-30 
inches from the ground; husked ears long and moderately plump, 
8-10 x I?- I 7 - inches, strongly tapering from the medial to the 
apex; rows 8, often separated in pairs, especially near the base; 



kernels in milk stage white; at dry stage dull white, broadly rounded 
over the crown, broader than deep, ' 2 inch wide, :i g inch deep 
crinkled." 

Everbearing. Refs. 76, 97, 126, 350, 351, 367, 368, 
403, 411, 443, 509, 510, 513, 533, 535, 537, 538. 
Syn. New Everbearing. 
Everbearing, when introduced by Wm. Henry Maule, 
Philadelphia, in 1892, and W. Atlee Burpee Seed Co., 
presented a rather new and distinct plant type. The 
husk and stalks were of a distinct red color and as 
an additional feature " the stalk usually produced 
2 good ears; when these ears were taken off another lot 
of ears set and developed on the same stalk." The 
editor of the Rural New Yorker raised the question as 
to how this new set was pollinated, for unless new 
tassels were also present there would not be fresh pollen 
for the late ears. The second set was probably the 
ears on the tillers which received their pollen at the 
same time as the early ears, the development of these 
ears being delayed. As reported by Price and Drinkard 
the plant of Everbearing was above medium in height, 
stout and a healthy grower with ears short, small and 
with 12 rows. The variety was listed for about 10 
years although the name has been used in late years as 
a synonym of Howling Mob. 

Extra Early Dawn. Ref. 229. 

This variety, offered sometime previous to 1914 by 
Thos. Griswold & Co. of South Wethersfield, Connecticut, 
was in no way similar to the variety listed in 1892 by 
Johnson & Stokes as Early Dawn. It had been in use for 
many years and was introduced as the earliest sweet corn 
in cultivation. It was undoubtedly a selection from Red 
Cory and originated in Vermont. In form, size and 
appearance it somewhat resembled that variety but was 
a week or ten days earlier. For a few years it was 
quite popular. It was listed by Joseph Harris in 1912, 
as Early Dawn by Thorburn in 1919 and by Vick in 
1922, the latter describing it with ears 6 inches long, 
8 rows of clear juicy kernels sometimes tinged with red. 
The strain which became Early Dightcn probably came 
as the result of selection from Extra Early Dawn. 

Farmers' Club. Refs. 9, 14, 215. Syns. Farm Club, 
Farmers' Club Sweet, New York Farmer's Club, 
Olcott, Olcott's Farmers' Club, Trimble, Trimble's 
Improved, Trimble's Sugar. 
The first notice of this unusual variety, accord- 
ing to available records, appeared in the 1869 catalog 
of James J. H. Gregory, Marblehead, Massachusetts, 
although a year later it was offered by other seeds- 
men, including Dreer and Hovey. At that time it 
was reported that the entire plant was of a red caste, 
but producing white ears " remarkably sweet and 
tender." Dreer called it the " richest, sweetest, tender- 
est of all with stalks and leaves medium size, heavily 
marked with purple." 

Recently a variety of sweet corn called Farmers' 
Club, which appeared to fit the above description, was 
observed at Milford, Connecticut. Dr. D. F. Jones of 
the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, New 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



41 



Haven, Connecticut, says, " We have grown Farmers' 
Club corn for a number of years, the seed being obtained 
from Mr. Walter Olcott, South Manchester, Connecticut. 
Mr. Olcott states that this variety has been in his 
family for some time, and does not know its origin." 
It has been reported to be outstanding for quality, 
quite similar in this respect to Cupid or Sugarsweet 
of Henderson. In season it is about the same as Golden 
Bantam. The description to follow is that of the 
Olcott stock and will serve to indicate the individualism 
of the variety. 

Plant medium tall, 5-532 feet; stalk distinctly zigzag and 
slender; nodes 9—10, distinctly exposed, solid red in color; internodes 
red; tillers very many, equal in height to central stalk. Leaves 
dark green with margins and midribs deep red; sheath much shorter 
than internodes, heavily shaded with red. Tassels medium long 
and heavily shaded with red. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, 2 ears per stalk with nubbin 
often appearing on tillers; husk leaves moderately long, same color 
as regular leaves. Husked ears moderately short and slender, 
6-7 x lj'g-l}^ inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering; tip 
abruptly conical, exposed; rows 8-10, straight, crowded around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather small, shallow, very sweet; 
at dry stage dull white with a very slight pinkish cast; ovate; 
slightly and shallowly wrinkled; set tightly on white cob. 

Favorite. Ref. 104. 

Favcrite, first licted in 1926 by Cassel's Seed 
Store, Lansdale, Pennsylvania, was one of the very 
latest varieties in the trials at Geneva. Its origin 
is unknown, and as compared to all other varieties 
grown in our trials was quite distinct. The type, how- 
ever, was similar to the descriptions given for Triumph 
in earlier writings and therefore it would seem as though 
this variety resulted as a selection from one of the old 
8-rowed, long, slender-eared sorts, all of v/hich were 
late in season. 

At Geneva 98 days were required to produce edible 
ears. This was in season with Stowell's Evergreen, 
4 days later than Nectar and 2 days earlier than Mam- 
moth Sugar. The plants of this variety most resemble 
those of Nectar, being of equal height but consistently 
inclined to tiller more freely. Both have green bracts 
on the tassels with decidedly less striping than occurs 
on Stowell's Evergreen. The ears, however, are borne 
higher on the stalk, not inclined to be pendant as in 
Nectar, and possess fewer but considerably longer husks. 
The husked ears are 1 to 2 inches longer, decidedly more 
tapering at the apex, and contain 8 rows more often than 
12, the latter number being present in Nectar. This is 
one of the less coarse-appearing late varieties that has 
proved to be exceptionally sweet and tender. It should 
be a popular home garden variety for those who dislike 
the larger eared sorts. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
usually covered, not prominent. Erace roots present, heavy, 
useful and complete on one node, non-functional ones present on 
second node. Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk, 
often bear good ear. Leaves long and medium broad, 34-36 x 3 1 £-4 
inches; sheath equal to and often longer than internode. Tassel 
moderately long, moderately heavy and coarse, 18-20 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately erect to slightly 
drooping, short to medium long, very many, decidedly crowded 
and branched at the base; bracts green, very slight to no stripe; 
anthers variable in color; 74-76 days to anthesis. 



Ears borne at 6th, 7th and 8th nodes, two ears per stalk with 
an additional nubbin usually present. Shank medium long, 4-5 
inches, heavy and tough. Husk leaves moderately many, decidedly 
short and light. Husks moderately few, long, tightly wrapped and 
rather difficult to remove. Husked ear long and moderately slender, 
9-10 x l'.i-l^ inches, slightly tapering to moderately cylindrical; 
base rounded and compressed; tip long and conical, slightly exposed 
and occasionally capped; rows 8-12, straight, occasionally irregular 
at the base, rather crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, moderately thick; 
at dry stage nearly white, slightly longer than wide, rather thin, 
1.1 x 1.0 x .34 cm. (124 seeds per oz.); definitely triangular in 
shape; crown very slightly rounded; surface abundantly, finely 
and shallowly wrinkled, sides more or less creased and depressed; 
set slightly loose on cob. 

First Prize. Ref. 186. 

Introduced in 1923 by Alexander Forbes and 
Company of Newark, New Jersey; this variety has 
proved at Geneva to be much like Howling Mob. No 
information is available concerning its origin. The 
variety ceased to be listed after 1928. 

At Geneva it produced edible ears in 87 days, 
practically the same season as Howling Mob and Alameda 
Sweet. The plants were about 6 to 8 inches shorter 
than those of Howling Mob, less streaked with red, and 
much less inclined to tiller. The husked ears were of 
equal length, but slightly more plump at the base and 
correspondingly more tapering. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 > 2 feet; tillers few, much shorter 
than central stalk. Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and two 
per stalk. Husked ear moderately long and plump, 7-9 x ljj— 2J4 
inches, decidedly tapering; rows 12-16, slightly irregular at the 
base. 

Five-Eared Sugar. Refs. 372, 406. 

In 1907, H. W. Johnson found among his trial 
grounds a stalk of corn containing five well-filled ears. 
This was saved and subsequently selected for two years. 
In 1909, the Johnson Seed Company of Philadelphia 
introduced it to the trade. The ears were of medium size 
and had irregular rows. The introducer says, " It was 
somewhat similar to the old Shoe Peg, which was one 
of its parents, but was earlier and deliriously sweet." 
The variety was carried by Johnson until the organi- 
zation dissolved. It apparently never obtained more 
than the status of a novelty. 

In 1914, the Moore Seed Company of the same city 
introduced a variety under the name of Shallcross' 
Five-Eared Sugar. This was a vigorous grower having 
plants 9 to 10 feet high and producing ears 8 inches long 
containing 10 to 12 regular rows, supposedly well filled 
and attractive. It was only listed for a few years and 
not known to any extent. 

Floraeroft Beauty. 

Little is known concerning the origin of this sort, 
named after the Stokes trial grounds. The Walter 
P. Stokes Seed Company of Philadelphia listed it 
about 1913, but soon discontinued it in favor of Kendel's 
Early Giant. It was one of the parents used by Arthur 
L. Richie in producing Sunnyslope Special. The 
meagre information at hand indicates that it was an 
early corn having ears 6 to 7 inches long with 10 to 12 



42 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



rows of good sized deep grains. The plants were 5 to 6 
feet tall, often producing two ears per stalk. 

Ford's Early. Refs. 22, 90, 91, 188, 328, 329, 345, 350, 
412, 427, 450, 454, 507, 508, 510, 512, 518, 533, 

537, 538. Syns. Ford's, Ford's Early Sweet. 
Ford's Early was first sent out for trial by Frank 

Ford & Son, Ravenna, Ohio, in 1881. It was also listed 
by Vaughan and by Goodell in 1883. Some growers and 
seedsmen considered it as a synonym of Early Minnesota, 
but as grown in our trials it showed certain characteristics 
which would tend to place it as a separate variety. 
When first introduced it probably was more like Minne- 
sota since it reputedly arose through selection and not as 
the result of a cross. 

Eighty-five days were required for ears to reach 
edible maturity at Geneva; which proved to be 3 days 
later than Fordhook Early, about the same season as 
Kendel's Early Giant, and 2 days earlier than Crosby. 
The plants are the same height as those of Fordhook 
but somewhat heavier and straighter with the few 
tillers much taller in proportion to the central stalk. 
The ears are borne about the same position but are 
attached to shanks that are considerably shorter. The 
husks are more loosely wapped and easier to remove. 
The husked ears are slightly longer, more consistently 
8 -rowed, and contain kernels which in the dry stage are 
not as noticeably broad as those of Fordhook. This 
old variety has been used for the market garden in the 
Middle West for many years and has enjoyed an enviable 
reputation for consistent performance. 

Plant medium tall, 5^-6 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
slightly zigzag; nodes 7-8, exposed, prominent; internodes dis- 
tinctly long. Brace roots present, slender, whorl complete and 
moderately useful. Tillers few, slightly shorter than central stalk. 
Leaves short and medium broad, 20-25 x 3j^-4 inches; sheath 
shorter than internode. Tassel medium long and slender, 15-18 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets drooping, many present, 
crowded and multi-branched; bracts green, moderately striped with 
red; anthers usually some variation of reddish bronze (terra cotta 
to vinaceous russet); 62-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and very often two ears 
per stalk, one nubbin usually present. Shank medium long and 
heavy, 4-5 inches. Husks moderately many, heavy, rather short 
and loosely wrapped, easily removed. Husked ear moderately 
long and moderately slender, 7—9 x 1 J 8 — 1 j> j inches, slightly tapering 
and partly cylindrical; base slightly enlarged and expanded; tip 
abruptly conical, slightly exposed and occasionally capped; rows 8, 
occasionally paired, straight, usually crowded around cob, paired 
rows with furrows deep and narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, broad, rather shallow 
and thick; at dry stage dull white, broader than long; .90 x 1.16 x .41 
cm. (100 seeds per oz.); short broad oval in shape; crown semi- 
circular; surface sparsely and very shallowly wrinkled; set tightly 
on cob. 

Genesee. Refs. 22, 430, 434, 443, 507, 508, 533, 537, 

538. Syns. Crosman's Genesee, Genesee Early, 
Genesee Early Sugar. 

This sort is supposed to have originated as a cross 
involving Minnesota Early and Amber Cream and 
according to Sturtevant was introduced to the trade 
in 1883. Indications are that it was never widely 
cataloged, although apparently was in existence for 
30 years or more, having appeared in the 1913 catalog 



of the Philip-Thompson Co. of Wilmington, Delaware. 
This organization apparently considered it a variety 
of some consequence, as they say " Genesee Early 
Sugar produces larger ears than other varieties of 
early sugar corn, in fact, nearly as large as the late 
varieties. It is very hardy, and may be planted almost 
as early as the Adams and other like varieties, while it 
surpasses them so far in quality that they are unsalable 
as soon as the Genesee Early comes on the market." 
The description to follow is based largely on Sturte- 
vant 's description of the dry ears. No more recent 
data are available. 

Plant medium tall, 5-6 feet, with ears borne about 10 inches 
from the ground. Dry ears 6-7 x 1 ' _. inches, nearly cylindrical but 
tapering near the tip; base compressed; rows 12, moderately straight, 
crowded around the cob; kernels at dry stage whitish amber, blunt, 
wedge-shaped; crown slightly rounded, diverging; surface rather 
deeply wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Governor Gilman. Ref. 283. 

The Iowa Seed Company of Des Moines, Iowa, 
introduced this sort in 1913. It originated with Gilman 
of Minnesota as the result of a cross between Golden 
Bantam and an unknown larger early white variety. 
Although the variety produced both white and yellow 
kernels, it was reputed as possessing unexcelled quality. 
As far as can be determined, the variety was only 
carried by the one organization and was discontinued 
by that one in 1920. No specific data are available, 
although a catalog illustration indicates it to be a 
12- to 14-rowed ear about 6 to 7 inches long. 

Granite State. Refs. 182, 195. 

Little information is at hand concerning this variety. 
It was introduced by Fottler, Fiske and Rawson in 1911, 
and with the exception of 1914 and 1915, carried until 
1924 when the firm was reorganized as the Fiske Seed 
Company. This organization listed the stock one year 
and then dropped it. 

The variety was reputed to be similar to that of 
Moore's Concord, but apparently earlier. The plants 
were about 5 feet high, bearing their " large ears for 
early corn " well down on the stalk. The husked ears 
were 7 to 9 inches long and had 12 to 14 rows of kernels 
well filled at the tip. 

Guarantee. Refs. 290, 368, 510. 

Introduced about 1892 by Johnson and Stokes; this 
variety was procured from a market gardener of Chester 
County, Pennsylvania. Nothing further is known of the 
stock from which it was derived. It was apparently very 
popular with the customers, since the introducers 
remark, " We have seen his supply of this corn sold out 
before 8 o'clock in the morning, long before the market 
was half over, notwithstanding the fact his price was 
always 10 cents per dozen above his competitors." 

Although never grown at Geneva, the Michigan 
Station reported it to be about in season and general 
appearance with Everbearing. The plants were 5 feet 
tall, produced ears 8 inches long which were slender, 
very sweet, and with a white cob. 




LONG ISLAND BEAUTY 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




MAMMOTH 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



43 



[fence's Early. Refs. 207, 208, 405, 533. 

A. W. Livingston's Sons. Columbus, Ohio, offered 
this new variety in 1895. A customer " down East " had 
sent a peck of seed from a strain which had been selected 
and grown for many years. It was quite superior to the 
corn his neighbors grew, so much so that it enabled him 
to " lay in the shade " his fellow marketers. An illus- 
tration in the 1897 catalog shows a rather long ear 
with 8 rows and broad kernels. In season it was con- 
sidered a second early. Livingston listed Hance's Early 
for nearly 10 years, when it was dropped in favor of 
some of the larger eared new varieties. 

Hematite Sweet. Ref. 468. 

This variety was mentioned by- J. H. Salisbury in 
1848 as having an 8-rowed ear with white kernels and a 
red cob. No record of the cataloging or growing of this 
corn has been found, but it probably was the form from 
which Red Cob Sweet was selected. The name Hema- 
tite, one of the important iron ores, was probably con- 
sidered quite appropriate to use to designate redness of 
cob. 

Henderson. Refs. 22, 61, 90, 91, 125, 126, 207, 208, 

238, 241, 258, 350, 397, 403, 405, 508, 509, 512, 

515, 533, 535, 536, 537, 538. 

This variety originated as a selection from Hickox 

and was developed by C. W. Beardsley of Milford, 

Connecticut. It was introduced by Peter Henderson 

in 1887 and continues to be listed to the present time. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 96 days, 

4 days later than Metropolitan, 2 days earlier than 

Stowell's Evergreen, and about the same season as 

Country Gentleman. The plants are 1 to 1 : o feet taller 

than those of Metropolitan, have less tendency to tiller, 

and are more streaked with red on the tassels. The 

husked ears are longer and somewhat more plump, 

having from 2 to 4 more rows of kernels. The kernels 

in the dry stage are not quite as long in proportion to 

the breadth as those of Metropolitan, but otherwise are 

very similar. This is one of the large late varieties 

that have been so popular on the New York market. 

Plant tall, 7 ] j— 8 feet: stalks straight and moderately heavy; 
nodes 10-12, slightly exposed, moderately prominent, slightly 
streaked with red at the base. Brace roots present, heavy, whorl 
complete and useful on one node. Tillers few, slightly shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium broad, 
32-34 x 3 ' _.— *'_■ inches; sheath slightly shorter than internode. 
Tassel long and heavy, 20-22 inches, often streaked with red at the 
base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately erect, medium 
long, many present, crowded, multi-branched; bracts and anthers 
variable in color; 71-73 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank long and heavy, 5-8 
inches. Husk leaves moderately long and many. Husks many, 
short, heavy, rather tightly wrapped and somewhat difficult to 
remove. Husked ear long and moderately plump, 9-10 x lJg-2Ji 
inches, slightly tapering; base moderately compressed to slightly 
open; tip abruptly conical and nearly capped; rows 12-16; moder- 
ately straight, regular, moderately crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white; small, narrow and short: at dry 
stage dull white, longer than broad, .95 x .88 x .4 cm. 1 112 seeds per 
oz.); somewhat blunt, triangular in shape; crown rounded; sur- 
face abundantly and rather shallowly wrinkled; set moderately 
tight on cob. 



Hiawatha. Refs. 238, 259, 403. 

C. W. Beardsley of Milford, Connecticut, originated 
this variety as a selection from Crosby's Early. Seed 
was obtained by- the Peter Henderson Company of New 
York who introduced it in 1906 and carried it until 1920. 
It was apparently much like Crosby with plants about 5 
feet tall producing ears about 8 inches long with 12 to 14 
and occasionally 16 rows of medium sized, deep kernels. 
It was well wrapped with heavy husks and reputed to 
have remained for a considerable period in the milk stage. 

Hickox. Refs. 22, 35, 61, 73, 74, 89, 90, 91, 238, 240, 
241, 275, 278, 344, 350, 367, 368, 397, 403, 411, 
423, 431, 435, 487, 503, 507, 508, 511, 515, 517, 
533, 535, 536, 537, 538. Syns. Creedmoor, 
Hickox Canner, Hickox Canning, Hickox Im- 
proved, Hickox Improved Sugar, " Mammoth 
Sugar," Sugar Giant. 
Hickox from the time of its introduction about 
1883 to the present time has been considered as a 
standard variety for canning. Little is known of its 
early history. It was listed by Gregory in 1885, by 
Ferry in 1888, and by nearly all seed merchandizers 
during the nineties. Since it most resembles other 
varieties in the Late Mammoth group, it probably 
originated as a selection from one of these sorts. There 
is some indication that when first introduced an occasional 
cob appeared showing a red stain in the interior. Early 
descriptions also show a variance of from 8 to 12 in the 
number of rows on the ear. 

Ninety-seven days were required for Hickox to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This proved to be in 
season with Country Gentleman, 10 days later than 
Crosby and 1 day earlier than Stowell's Evergreen. The 
plants are equal in height to those of Stowell's Evergreen, 
have fewer tillers, and have nodes more consistently 
covered by the sheath. The husks are longer and some- 
what more tightly wrapped, while the husked ears are 
about the same length but less plump and more cylin- 
drical, containing only 12 rows instead of 16 to 18. 
Hickox is more widely used in this State today as a 
white canning corn than any other white variety. Its 
consistent high yield of good quality corn has made it 
highly deserving of the place it fills in the growers' 
program. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 10-12, usually covered, not prominent. Brace roots present 
and complete on one node, heavy and useful. Tillers few, much 
shorter than central stalk. Leaves long and medium broad, 
34-36 x 3?4-4' i inches; sheath equal to and longer than internodes. 
Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches, occasionally 
colored at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets slightly 
drooping, moderately many present, long and rather crowded; 
bracts green, moderately striped with red; anthers somewhat 
variable in color; 71-73 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 6th and 7th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk, one occasionally a nubbin. Husk leaves short and light. 
Husks many, heavy, long and tightly wrapped, not easily removed. 
Husked ear moderately long and moderately plump, 8-9 x l 3 4-2 
inches; moderately cylindrical and slightly tapering; base enlarged 
and compressed; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 12, regular, 
moderately straight, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately wide, medium depth 
I and thickness; at dry stage clear, almost translucent white, medium 



44 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



size; medium width, rather long and medium thick, 1.1 x .85 x .40 
cm. (140 seeds per oz.r, long triangular in shape; crown slightly 
rounded; surface shallowly, abundantly and finely wrinkled; set 
tightly on cob. 

Honey. Kefs. 11, 22, 63, 90, 91, 126, 207, 274, 367, 

368, 403, 442, 444, 508, 509, 510, 518, 533, 536, 

537. Syns. Honey Sweet, New Honey Sweet, The 

Honey. 

This is another of the red foliage varieties of past 

decades. It originated with a German market gardener 

near Allentown, Pennsylvania, and was introduced at 

least as early as 1890, at which time it was featured by 

J. J. H. Gregory. J. J. Bell of Windsor, New York, 

listed it in 1892, as did Johnson 8s Stokes a year later. 

In many respects it was apparently much like 

Crosby. Reports indicate, " Plants taller than those 

of Crosby and will average more ears per stalk, of about 

the same shape, size and number of rows, though the 

rows are not quite so close together. . . . The objections 

to the Honey Sweet for market would be its purple 

husks." 

Honey Boy. Refs. 345, 471. 

This was introduced by the John A. Salzer Seed 
Company, La Crosse, Wisconsin, in 1920, and has con- 
tinued to be listed to the present time. As grown at 
Geneva it has proved to be somewhat variable from year 
to year, not always producing consistently the type as 
originally sold. Inasmuch as available information from 
the introducers indicates it to be a very early sort, the 
data obtained at Geneva for those years that properly 
indicate its season here have been used. 

Plant moderately short, 4j-£— 5 feet; stalks slender and moder- 
ately straight. Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, 1 and 2 ears per 
stalk. Husked ears moderately short and medium plump, 6-7 x 1 %— 
1 '■ i inches, nearly cylindrical; rows 12-14. Kernels at milk stage 
creamy white, plump. 

Honey Dew. Refs. 106, 328, 329, 359, 533. 

The name Honey Dew, which certainly should be an 
attractive cognomen for any sweet corn, has been vested 
upon two separate introductions. Its first appearance 
was in 1893 when John Lewis Childs of Floral Park, New 
York, offered Childs' Honey Dew. This was listed in 
Childs' catalogs from 1893 to 1922 and during this period 
the seed supply was grown by Comstock, Ferre & Co., 
under supervision of Mr. Willard. So far as we know 
there is no published description of the variety, but the 
foil wing is taken from recent correspondence: " The 
variety was white, somewhat resembling Champion 
Sugar, with ears possibly an inch or two longer and a 
little more pointed. Stalks grew at least six to seven 
feet tall." Henry F. Michell & Co., Philadelphia, 
offered Honey Dew in 1906 which was possibly the same 
as that offered by Childs. 

The second introduction of Honey Dew (Refs. 241, 
277, 348, 505, 513, 514. Syn. Chinese Early.) was in 
1930 by Stumpp 8s Walter Co., New York City. This 
variety originated with L. J. Muller, gardener for 
Howard Phipps, Esq., at Westbury, Long Island. Mr. 
Muller crossed Chinese Midget with Golden Bantam 
and called the selection from this cross Honey Dew. 



It was also sold in 1928 by William M. Hunt 8s Co. of 
New York as Chinese Early. Because of the unusual 
sweetness of this sweet corn it is rather difficult to get 
seed, for the birds are attracted to it and destroy the 
ears. The comparison and description to follow have 
reference to the present day variety. 

At Geneva 78 days were required to produce edible 
ears. This was in season with Midget, nearly 2 weeks 
earlier than Lyman's Pride, and 3 days later than 
Early June. The plants are 1 ) ■> to 2 feet taller than 
those of Midget, very much less inclined to tiller, have 
slightly longer leaves and tassels, and have slightly 
less red coloring on the various plant parts. The 
ears are borne higher on the stalk and when husked 
are 1} ■> to 2 inches longer and slightly less slender. The 
variety should be considered in the novelty class from 
the standpoint of yield, appearance, and amount of 
stover produced. Although small of ear, its tenderness 
and sweetness is not to be denied. To those home 
gardeners who seek variety in sweet corn, this colorful 
sort will be a noticeable addition. 

Plant moderately short, 4— 4'j feet; stalks slender, straight 
to very slightly zigzag; nodes 7-8, covered, not prominent; inter- 
nodes dark green, heavily streaked to solid red at the base of the 
nodes and on exposed surfaces. Brace roots absent. Tillers 
moderately many, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves 
short and narrow, 20-22 x 2';>-3, 1 4 inches, colored red on the 
margin with midrib pale red to pink; sheath equal to and longer 
than internode. Tassel short and medium heavy, 12-14 inches, 
streaked with dark red at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral 
spikelets nearly erect, many present, medium long, crowded; bracts 
very dark green, heavily striped with dark maroon red, ringed at 
the base with dark red; anthers yellow Ipinard yellow), uniform; 
56-58 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two ears 
per stalk. Shank short and slender, 1 ] L »-2 inches. Husk leaves 
medium in number, short and light. Husks few, short and moder- 
ately tightly wrapped. Silk very scanty, rather short and easily 
removed, uniformly pale greenish yellow in color. Husked ear 
moderately short and slender, 5-6 x 1 } 4-1 3 g inches, moderately 
tapering, partly cylindrical; base slightly enlarged and compressed; 
tip conical and exposed; rows 8, moderately straight, or slightly 
irregular at the middle, moderately crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, shallow and moderately 
thin; at dry stage dull amber white, small, .9 x .97 x .34 cm. (140 
seeds per oz. ) ; distinctly triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; 
surface quite finely and abundantly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Howling Mob. Refs. 3, 26, 47, 80, 124, 211, 335, 344, 
403, 463, 478, 480, 525, 546. Syns. Early Butter- 
nut, Early Butternut Sugar, Early Howling Mob, 
" Everbearing," Silver Beauty. 
This name is neither descriptive of the plant nor of 
the ear of this variety, but is rather the impression of 
his customers which was left with the originator, C. D. 
Keller of Toledo, Ohio, after a trip to market. The 
name is peculiar and apt for according to the story of 
Mr. Keller, as soon as his wagon was parked in the 
market stall it would be surrounded by buyers making a 
loud and clamorous demand for the ears. 

Mr. Keller sent a small package of seed of his new 
variety to W. Atlee Burpee in 1903. This sample did 
so well in the Fordhook trial grounds that arrangements 
were made with Mr. Keller to grow a crop of seed for 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



45 



Burpee in 1904. It was introduced as Howling Mob in 
1905 and sold as a novelty. 

Eighty -eight days were required for this variety to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 4 days later 
than Kendel's Early Giant, about the same season as 
Crosby, and 6 days earlier than Delicious. The plants 
are slightly taller than those of Kendel's Early Giant, 
are heavier, and have tassels that are slightly longer 
and more bushy. The ears possess husks that are longer 
and more tightly wrapped, while the husked ears are 
1 to 2 inches longer, much more tapering and thicker 
at the base. Howling Mob has been used extensively 
by market gardeners throughout the East and Middle 
West. For a midseason white variety, there is none 
more popular. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
straight; nodes 10-12, exposed and somewhat prominent; intemodes 
heavily streaked with dark red on exposed surfaces. Brace roots 
present and complete on one node. Tillers moderately many, 
slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately long and 
medium broad. 32-34 x 3 1 £—4 inches; sheath shorter than internode. 
Tassel moderately long and medium heavy, 18-20 inches; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately erect, medium long, many 
present and crowded; bracts and anthers variable in color; 64-65 
days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, often two per stalk. Shank 
moderately long. 4-8 inches. Husk leaves many, long and heavy. 
Husks decidedly many, moderately heavy, medium long and 
rather tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately long and moder- 
ately plump, 8-9 x l 3 4-2 inches, slightly tapering; base slightly 
enlarged and compressed; tip conical and exposed; rows 12-16, 
usually regular and straight, somewhat irregular at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather narrow and shallow; 
at dry stage dull white, medium size; medium width and length 
but quite thick, .96 x .88 x .40 cm. (132 seeds per oz.); roughly 
triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface slightly rough 
and rather finely wrinkled, portions almost pebbled; set moderately 
tight on cob. 

Improved Giant. Refs. 193, 353, 518, 522, 533. 
Syns. Early Giant, Giant, Improved Early Giant, 
Maule's Improved Giant. 

Wm. Henry Maule introduced this variety in 
1901 as one of the largest sweet corn sorts. It origi- 
nated with " one of the most successful market gardeners 
in the Northwest," but no information is available as to 
its exact progenitor. 

At the time of the introduction, Improved Giant 
apparently lacked the height that present stocks possess, 
since reports indicate " the plants to be comparatively 
short, but so thick and strong, they will stand up against 
storms and rains." 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 94 days, 
which was 10 days later than Kendel's Early Giant, 
about in season with Early Evergreen, and 5 days 
earlier than Long Island Beauty. The plants were 
much heavier and taller than those of Kendel's Early 
Giant, more like those of Favorite, Long Island Beauty, 
and Late Mammoth. 

Plant tall, 8-8 L 2 feet; nodes 12-14, slightly exposed; tassels 
long, coarse and heavy, 20-22 inches. Ears are borne on the 
4th to 5th nodes, one and two ears with an occasional nubbin 
present. Husked ears long and moderately plump, 9-10 x ljg— 2 
inches, very slightly tapering; tip abruptly conical, often capped: 
rows 14-16, straight and regular; kernels at milk stage white; 



at dry stage opalescent white, longer than wide, rather thick, 
1.1 x .90 x .41 cm., triangular in shape; abundantly wrinkled. 

Independence. Refs. 142, 345, 469, 481, 533. Syns. 
Fourth of July, Market Gardeners Extra Early. 

John A. Salzer Seed Co., La Crosse, Wisconsin, first 
offered this variety in 1905 and it has proved to be well 
adapted to growing conditions as found in the Mississippi 
valley. The seed came originally from Connecticut. 
Stocks as grown at Geneva have not been uniform in 
type. 

Eighty-two days were required for this variety to 
produce edible ears. This was 2 weeks earlier than Best 
of All, 6 days earlier than White Cory, and 2 days 
later than Mammoth White Cory. The plants are the 
same height as those of Best of All, less inclined to tiller, 
and have tassels that are longer and decidedly more 
slender and feathery. The husked ears are somewhat 
shorter than those of Best of All and equal to those of 
White Cory. This is another of the second early, 
slender, 8-rowed varieties. It is not widely grown and its 
acquaintance is limited. As with most white varieties, 
the decline in popularity of the type has been responsible 
for its present position, although previously this slender 
and attractive ear would have much in its favor. 

Plant moderate'y tall, 5 1 £—6 J ■_> feet; stalks moderately slender 
and slightly zigzag; nodes 8-9, exposed, prominent; intemodes 
streaked with red on exposed portions. Brace roots present, very 
slender and not useful. Tillers few, much shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves medium long and medium broad, 30—32 x 3}.j-3?4 
inches, occasionally colored on the margin; sheath shorter than 
internode. Tassel moderately long, very slender and feathery, 
18-20 inches; terminal spike drooping; lateral spikelets distinctly 
drooping, many, moderately long, somewhat multi-branched, 
crowded; bracts pale green, rather heavily striped with light red; 
anthers mostly pale reddish brown (terra cotta); 58-60 days to 
anthesis. 

Ears borne on 3rd and 4th nodes, often two ears per stalk, 
one usually a nubbin. Shank extremely variable, usually 6—9 
inches long, slender and brittle. Husks moderately few, long and 
rather tightly wrapped. Silk rather scanty, long and uniformly 
pale green in color. Husked ear medium long and slender, 
7-8 x I s s-1? 2 inches, partly cylindrical and very slightly tapering; 
base slightly enlarged and occasionally open; tip long, conical and 
exposed; rows 8, straight, occasionally somewhat irregular at the 
base, conveniently spaced around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately narrow and shallow; 
at dry stage dull white, small, short, slightly wider than long, 
.8 x 1.0 x .40 cm. (132 seeds per oz. I; short, broad oval in shape; 
crown distinctly rounded; surface moderately but shallowly wrinkled; 
set tightly on cob. 

Indiana Wonder. Refs. 156, 515, 533. Syn. Early 
Indiana. 
In 1899, Mr. James A. Everitt of Indianapolis, 
Indiana, introduced this variety which originated in 
the state of his residence. He took a keen pleasure 
in popularizing improvements in farm crops and spent 
a great deal of money advertising newer and better 
varieties. Indiana Wonder, although never attaining 
widespread attention, was reputed to have had much 
in its favor. Reports indicate that the variety was 
a strong and rapid grower, producing two and three 
ears to the plant, which were nearly twice as large as 
Adams Early, deep kerneled, and abundantly wrinkled 
when dry. 



46 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Kendel's Early Giant. Refs. 16, 132, 238, 241, 328, 

329, 345, 403, 499, 515, 525, 533, 546. Syns. 

Early Giant, Early Giant Sweet, " Giant," 

Kendel's Giant, Kendel's New Early Giant, 

Kendel's New Large Early Giant, New Early 

Giant. 

This large second early variety was introduced in 

1896 by A. C. Kendel of Cleveland, Ohio. The original 

stock was reported to have had larger ears, 8 to 10 inches 

long, and possessing 10 to 18 rows of kernels. Present 

day stocks, however, are somewhat shorter and more 

uniformly 12 -rowed. 

Eighty-four days were required for edible ears to 
be produced at Geneva. This was 4 days earlier than 
Howling Mob, in season with Early Minnesota, and 
4 days later than Whipple's Early. The plants are 
slightly shorter than those of Howling Mob, more 
slender, and have tassels slightly shorter and more 
scraggly in habit. The ears have husks that are shorter 
and more loosely wrapped, while the husked ears are 
1 to 2 inches shorter and much more cylindrical. It is 
used primarily as a home and market garden sort, and 
for the past 35 years or more has enjoyed widespread 
popularity. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6'j feet; stalks moderately slender 
and straight; nodes 8-10, slightly exposed, occasionally prominent, 
streaked with red at the base. Brace roots present but rather 
slender and not very useful. Tillers many, slightly shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves medium long and narrow, 30-32 x 2 3 . 1 -3 , 4 
inches, very often colored on the margin; sheath equal to and 
occasionally shorter than internode. Tassel medium long and 
slender, 17-18 inches, slightly streaked with red at the base; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately drooping, medium in 
number and length, not crowded; bracts and anthers somewhat 
variable in color; 64—68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank medium length and 
heavy, 3-5 inches. Husks moderately few, short and loosely 
wrapped. Husked ear medium long and moderately plump, 
7-8 x l?4-2 inches, slightly tapering; base somewhat enlarged and 
expanded; tip conical and exposed; rows 12, straight, regular and 
moderately crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, rather broad and 
very thick; at dry stage slightly wider than lcng, 1.1 x .9 x .4 cm. 
(116 seeds per oz.) ; roughly triangular in shape ; crown rounded ; 
surface abundantly wrinkled both on the crown and the sides; 
set moderately tight on cob. 

Laekey's Earh. Refs. 207, 208, 219, 238, 240, 328, 
329, 511, 515. Syns. Lackey, Lackey's Early 
Sweet, Lackey's New Early. 
Credit for the origin of this variety is given by 
Gregory to a Mr. Lackey of Marblehead, Massachusetts, 
who developed it as a selection out of Marblehead. In 
1890 it was introduced by J. J. H. Gregory as a variety. 
Although admittedly not as early as Cory or Marble- 
head, it was superior to either of them in its apparent 
resistance to smut and its decided increase in sweetness. 
Reports indicate that the variety produced plants 
about 5 J ■_> feet tall, with ears 7 inches long, containing 
8 rows of rather large, closely fitting kernels. No trace 
of red was evident. It was not widely cataloged; 
although Gregory carried it continuously up to 1915. 



Landreth Sugar. Refs. 22, 89, 91, 93, 126, 313, 350, 
397, 404, 411, 433, 507, 508, 511, 513, 514, 532, 
533, 537. Syns. Landreth, Landret % Late. 

Sturtevant gives the date of introduction in 1884 and 
since earlier records of the introducers, D. Landreth and 
Sons of Bristol, Pennsylvania, were destroyed by fire, no 
more accurate information is available. Since Tracy lists 
it as a synonym of Old Colony, it is probable that the 
selection originated from that source. Although appar- 
ently never cataloged by other organizations, it has 
been featured by the introducers continuously from its 
introduction. As such it is one of the very few old 
varieties that continue to exist among modern sorts. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 100 days, 
which proved to be 2 days later than Stowell's Ever- 
green, in season with Mammoth Sugar, and 3 days 
earlier than Cincinnati Market. It should be men- 
tioned, however, that stocks which were available during 
Sturtevant 's time were about 10 days earlier than modern 
data indicate. The plant much resembled Stowell's 
Evergreen, being of equal height and vigor, and pro- 
ducing ears of equal length with 16 to 18 rows of kernels. 
The kernels, however, were more narrow and lacked the 
converging crown so prominent in the latter. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7 feet; stalks heavy, foliage abund- 
ant, dark green; tillers many; tassels rather short, heavy and stiff. 
Ears borne 28-36 inches from the ground; husk leaves many, 
medium length. Husk ear moderately long and plump, 8-9 x 2-2 '4 
inches, moderately tapering; tip abruptly conical to rounded, well 
filled; rows 16—18, moderately straight, occasionally somewhat 
spiral, crowded around the cob. Kernels at milk stage white, medium 
size, moderately deep and narrow; at dry stage whitish amber, 
rather small, much longer than wide (150 seeds per oz. I ; triangular 
in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface moderately wrinkled; set 
loosely on cob. 

Leet's Early. Refs. 22, 90, 91, 96, 121, 170, 411, 510, 
511, 512, 513, 514, 535, 536, 538. Syn. Leets. 
D. M. Ferry listed this sort for the first time in 1888 
as a sweet corn that was given first premium at the Corn 
Show in Chicago in 1887 as the best early sweet corn. 
No information is available regarding its origin, although 
the reference made in early accounts to the presence of 
red foliage and an occasional red cob would indicate its 
origin to have been partially from the type represented 
by Narragansett. 

Plant 5 to 6 feet tall, stout with rather short internodes, a 
little taller than Early Minnesota and often red. The ears were 
borne 18-24 inches from the ground, very dull white, nearly cylindri- 
cal and abruptly conical at the tip, medium long and medium slender, 
6-8 x ly^r 1% inches; rows 8-12, somewhat irregular, pairs not 
distinct except in 8-rowed ears; kernels at dry stage fairly large 
and thick; crown rounded, rather coarse appearing; set on either 
white or red cob. 

Long Island Beauty. Refs. 62, 113, 386, 478, 525. 
Illus. 42. 
This is a variety which for many years has been 
grown as a late variety by Long Island farmers for the 
New York City market. Its popularity there led to its 
introduction on the Philadelphia market and in the 
South. The variety was first offered in 1903 by S. D. 
Woodruff & Sons, Orange, Connecticut. It is alleged 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



47 



to be a cross between Late Mammoth and Stowell's 
Evergreen. 

Ninety-nine days were required for Long Island 
Beauty to produce edible ears at Geneva. This was in 
season with Oregon Evergreen, 2 days later than Stowell's 
Evergreen and Squantum, and 4 days earlier than 
Cincinnati Market. The plants are equal in height and 
vigor to those of Mammoth Sugar, have a longer but 
less coarse appearing tassel, and the anthers are con- 
sistently more uniform in color. The ears are borne 
higher on the stalks and attached to longer shanks. 
The husked ears are of equal length but slightly more 
plump and less tapering. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks moderately heavy, straight; nodes 
12-14, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, heavy, whorl 
complete on one node, useful. Tillers few, slightly shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves very long and medium broad, 36^10 x 3) £-4 
inches; sheath longer than internode. Tassel long, rather heavy 
and coarse, 20-22 inches; terminal spike somewhat drooping, 
lateral spikelets slightly drooping, many present, moderately long 
and crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped with pale red; anthers 
light to buff yellow (pinard yellow to deep colonial buff); 74-76 
days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 6th and 7th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank long, very heavy and touch, 5-6 inches. 
Husk leaves many, moderately long and heavy. Husks many, 
rather long, somewhat loosely wrapped and rather easily removed. 
Husked ear long and plump, 9-10 x 2 a s — 2} 2 inches; moderately 
tapering; base slightly enlarged and compressed; tip conical and 
slightly exposed; rows 14-16, regular, moderately straight, crowded 
around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, fairly broad, closely set and 
moderately deep; at dry stage dull white; moderately large, long, 
medium width and thin, 1.15 x .87 x .38 cm. (104 seeds per oz.); 
triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface often abundantly 
and finely wrinkled; set moderately loose. 

Lyman's Pride. Ref. 250. Syn. Stay Green. 

Correspondence with the Charles C. Hart Seed Com- 
pany of Wethersfield, Connecticut, indicates this variety 
to be of unknown parentage, originating with a private 
gardener, Mr. D. A. Lyman of Columbus, Connecticut, 
who had grown it for a number of years. It was intro- 
duced by Hart in 1927 as a high-quality midseason 
variety. 

At Geneva 91 days were required for this variety 
to produce edible ears. This was 7 days later than 
Early Minnesota, 3 days later than Howling Mob, and 
3 days earlier than Nectar. The plants are about the 
same height as those of Early Minnesota, but decidedly 
more heavily and uniformly shaded with red at the base 
of the nodes, on the margins of the leaves, and more 
consistently red-streaked on the sheaths. The tassels 
are similar in height, but those of Lyman's Pride have 
laterals decidedly drooping and much more heavily 
striped with red on the bracts. The tassel and foliage 
coloring more closely resembles that of Midget and 
Honey Dew. The husked ears are very similar in shape 
and size to those of Early Minnesota with the dry kernels 
in both instances broader than long. The variety is 
little known in other than certain localized areas, such 
as Eastern Connecticut where it has been reported to 
be very popular. Its chief value is said to be due to 
its ability to stay tender and milky " often remaining 



as tender 10 days after ripening as it was when just 
ready to eat." 

Plant moderately short, 4} 2-5 feet; stalks straight and slender; 
nodes 8-9, covered, not prominent, shaded with red at the base. 
Brace roots absent. Tillers moderately many, somewhat shorter 
than central stalk. Leaves medium long and moderately narrow, 
30-32 x 2 s . 1-3) 2 inches, uniformly red along the margin; sheath 
longer than internode, moderately striped with dark red on the 
outer surface. Tassel moderately long and slender, 18-20 inches, 
very slow in spreading, streaked with dark red at the base; terminal 
spike drooping; lateral spikelets moderately drooping, moderately 
many, long and rather crowded, usually branched at the base; 
bracts dark green, very heavily striped with dark red, often entirely 
red; anthers uniformly reddish bronze (terra cotta), 70-72 days to 
anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank variable in length, 
slender and brittle. Husk leaves few and usually short. Husks 
moderately few, rather heavy, long, tightly wrapped but easily 
removed; exposed portions heavily streaked with red. Husked 
ear medium long and moderately slender, 7-8 x 1 ? jj— 1 5 £ inches, 
nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering; occasionally base somewhat 
open; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 8, occasionally 10, 
moderately paired, straight, occasionally irregular at the base, not 
crowded around the cob; furrows deep and very narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, very short and 
moderately thick; at dry stage dull white, much broader than long, 
1.03 x 1.29 x .44 cm. (76 seeds per oz.); short broad oval in shape; 
crown rounded; surface abundantly and rather finely wrinkled; 
set moderately tight on cob. 

Malakhoff. Refs. 190, 237, 238, 241, 335, 462, 465, 
518, 533. Syns. Amber Malakhoff, Early Malak- 
hoff, White Malakhoff. 

The varieties of sweet corn unlike those of most 
other food crops known and cultivated as vegetables 
have almost without exception arisen without recourse 
to any sorts or forms not native to this continent. 
Malakhoff is the single exception as far as the informa- 
tion at hand indicates. 

Seed of this variety was distributed by the United 
States Department of Agriculture in the spring of 1898. 
Prof. N. E. Hansen of South Dakota State College made 
a trip to Russia as agricultural explorer and his recollec- 
tion of this corn is contained in correspondence of recent 
date, as follows: " The Malakhoff sweet corn, as I 
remember it, was secured from Immer & Son Seed Com- 
pany at Moscow, Russia, in my 1897-8 tour. It dates 
from southern Russia but that is as far as I can trace it." 
There are two introductions from Russia on record at 
the Foreign Plant Introduction Office in Washington, 
as follows: S. P. I. No. 13 Zca Mays. From Moscow, 
Russia. Received through Prof. N. E. Hansen, Feb. 
1898 (6 packages). Earliest sweet corn from Malachows. 
F. P. I. No. 2799 from Russia (gov't of Tula) under the 
name Malakhoff through M. A. Carleton. A wax model 
of an ear of Malakhoff was shown in the exhibit of the 
United States Department of Agriculture at the Uni- 
versal Exposition at St. Louis in 1904 as the " earliest 
sweet corn." 

After trial in this country it appeared that in Russia 
this variety had been selected for earliness rather than 
uniformity of color, the color of the mature kernel 
varying from white to pale yellow or amber. It was the 
intention to breed this variety true for color, but as 



48 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



seedsmen began to introduce it, it was put on the market 
to establish priority and called Malakhoff which name 
suggests a place in the Crimean peninsula. 

Malakhoff was first offered by Vaughan's Seed 
Store and by James J. H. Gregory & Sons in 1906. 
For many years it was considered a good " first early " 
and as one writer said " perhaps a little too small for 
the market, yet we shall do wisely to welcome the 
Russian stranger into our home gardens." It has been 
used in the development of new varieties, particularly 
in Canada. Present stocks seem to be quite different 
from the original 8-rowed sort. Present-day Malakhoff 
is listed by the House of Gurney, Inc., Yankton, South 
Dakota. 

Little reliable information is at hand regarding the 
exact season. Originally this variety was a very early 
and prolific bearer, and as near as can be told, was as 
described below. Present stocks produce ears with 10 to 
1 2 rows but the original Malakhoff described below was 
an 8-rowed sort. As it exists it has little value even as 
a home garden variety, although an occasional selection 
has been brought to the attention of the authors that 
appears to be very uniform and attractive. 

Plant short, 3} 2-4 feet; stalks straight and very slender; 
nodes 6-7, covered, not prominent, slightly streaked with red at the 
base. Brace roots absent. Tillers few to none, slightly shorter 
than central stalk, occasionally bearing one good ear. Leaves 
short and narrow, 20-22 x 2}o— 3 inches; sheath equal to and often 
longer than internode. Tassel short and slender, 12-15 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to moderately 
erect, moderately short, few present but crowded, simple; bracts 
variable in color; anthers usually buff (deep colonial buff), few 
reddish bronze (terra cotta); 63-64 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank long and slender, 4—7 inches, 
brittle. Husk leaves few, short and light. Husks moderately 
many, medium length, rather loosely wrapped, easily removed. Silk 
medium in amount, long and pale red. Husked ear short and 
slender, 5-6 x 1?$— \] ■> inches; slightly tapering; base compressed; 
tip abruptly conical to rounded, slightly exposed; rows 8, straight 
and regular, occasionally paired in which case the furrows were 
deep and very narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium width, shallow and 
moderately thick; at dry stage dull white, slightly broader than 
long, .93 x 1.04 x .40 cm. (128 seeds per oz.); short oval in shape; 
crown rounded, surface moderately fine and abundantly wrinkled; 
set tightly on cob. 

.Mammoth. Refs. 17, 18, 22, 52, 73, 74, 89, 90, 91, 93, 
95, 96, 97, 120, 168, 238, 240, 241, 308, 328, 329, 
338, 344, 350, 367, 397, 403, 404, 405, 407, 408, 
411, 422, 423, 427, 432, 435, 487, 503, 507, 508, 
509, 510, 511, 514, 515, 516, 517, 518, 533, 535, 
536, 537, 538. Syns. Burvis Mammoth, Improved 
Mammoth, Large Late Mammoth, Late Mam- 
moth, Late Sugar Mammoth, Late Sweet Mam- 
moth, Mammoth Sugar, Mammoth Sweet, Mar- 
blehead Mammoth, Maule's Mammoth. Illus. 43. 
Whether or not plant and ear of this variety as 
grown today would be identical with plant and ear of the 
sort listed as Mammoth in 1867 cannot be verified. On 
the basis of comparing one variety with another the 
evidence indicates, however, that Mammoth has always 
represented the largest eared variety of sweet corn to be 



found. Gregory in his catalog of 1870 says of Mammoth 
Sweet, " My Mammoth took the first prize at the annual 
exhibitions of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 
1864 and 1867; the ears exhibited weighing as gathered 
from the stock, between two and three pounds each." 
Burr's Improved or Twelve-Rowed Sweet (87) was 
probably the precursor of all of the later appearing 
Mammoths. It is quite possible that this variety, 
together with Black Mexican and Stowell's Evergreen, 
has been listed for a longer time and has had a wider 
distribution than any other of the varieties of sweet 
corn. The very size of the ear of Mammoth has been 
considered a drawback on some markets, but since 
it takes " all sorts to make a world," there is a place 
for both the Midget " with three bites to the ear " 
and the Mammoth " one ear to a meal." 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 100 days, 
2 days later than Stowell's Evergreen and 3 days earlier 
than Cincinnati Market. The plants are the same 
height as those of Stowell's Evergreen, slightly heavier 
and have less tendency to tiller. The ears are borne 
about the same height on shanks that are slightly shorter, 
while the husks are somewhat more loosely wrapped 
and heavier. The husked ears are slightly longer, less 
plump, and contain 2 to 4 less rows. The kernels 
in the dry stage are much thicker, somewhat shorter in 
proportion to the width and lack the converging crown 
present in Stowell's Evergreen. The variety is used 
by home gardeners and by market gardeners who supply 
those city markets which demand the largest possible 
ears of good quality. 

Plant tall, 7 ' _>-8 feet; stalks straight and heavy; nodes 12-14, 
usually covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, complete, 
heavy and useful on one node. Tillers few, slightly shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium broad, 32-34 
x 3%— 4J:j; sheath equal to and longer than internode. Tassel 
moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches, very coarse; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to moderately erect, medium 
long, rather few and scattered; bracts green, sparsely striped with 
light red; anthers variable in color; 71-73 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank moderately short and heavy, 3-4 inches. 
Husks moderately many, medium length, coarse and heavy, rather 
loosely wrapped. Husked ear long and plump, 9-10 x 2 J4— 2 ' _> 
inches, moderately tapering; base enlarged and compressed; tip 
conical, slightly exposed and occasionally capped; rows 18-20, 
moderately straight, slightly irregular at the base, crowded around 
the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, distinctly thick; 
at dry stage dull white, longer than wide, 1.13 x .95 x .40 cm. (112 
seeds per oz.); triangular in shape; crown rounded, surface with 
moderately fine, rather abundant wrinkles, set loosely on cob. 

Mammoth White Cory. Refs. 11, 33, 67, 240, 241, 
297. 345, 348, 405, 516, 517, 518. Syns. Early 
Mammoth White Cory, Lakeview Early Market, 
Mammoth Cory, Mammoth White Cob Cory, 
New Mammoth White Cory, Selected Mammoth 
Early Cory. Illus. 48. 
This, the survivor of the Cory group, was introduced 
by D. M. Ferry 85 Co. of Detroit in 1897. To it the 
cognomen " King of the Market " was applied by 
Gregory as indicative of its popularity with the con- 
sumers. Because of changing market preferences at 




MAMMOTH WHITE CORY 



(Four-fifths natural size) 




MIDGET 



(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



49 



that time the small, early, 8-rowed varieties had begun 
to lose popularity. No longer was earliness the single 
primary factor of importance in establishing a variety, 
for size of ear was given major consideration. 

At Geneva 80 days were required for Mammoth 
White Cory to come into production. This proved to be 
8 days earlier than White Cory, in season with Whipple's 
Early, and 5 days later than Early Mayflower. Plants 
are 1 to 1 ' ■_> feet shorter than those of White Cory, more 
slender, with shorter internodes, less tendency to tiller, 
and with shorter, more coarse-appearing tassels. The 
ears are equal in length, contain 4 more rows, and are 
more plump. It has very largely replaced White Cory 
as a market and home garden variety and as such has 
proved very popular. Its comparative earliness coupled 
with its large yield has made it a favorite with many 
growers. 

Plant moderately short, 4' _.-5 feet; stalks slender and usually 
straight; nodes 9-10, usually covered, occasionally somewhat 
prominent; internodes slightly streaked with red on the exposed 
portions. Brace roots usually present on one node. Tillers 
moderately few present. Leaves medium long and narrow, 28-30 x 
2-*4-3 inches; sheath equal to and occasionally shorter than inter- 
node. Tassel medium length and moderately heavy, 15-18 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets erect, moderately many, 
rather scattered and short ; bracts green, rather heavily striped with 
red; anthers bronze red (terra cotta to vinaceous red); 55-60 days 
to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present. Shank medium long, 4-5 inches, 
slender and brittle. Husks many and rather heavy, loosely wrapped, 
easily removed. Husked ear medium long and medium plump, 
6-8 x 1 5.4-I "s inches, slightly tapering and partly cylindrical; 
rows 10-12, regular, occasionally somewhat curved and irregular 
at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately wide, thick and 
rather shallow; at dry stage, dull amber white, medium size and 
width, moderately short and thick, 1.0 x 1.07 x .39 cm. (128 seeds 
per oz. ); almost square, occasionally somewhat triangular; crown 
slightly rounded; surface moderately rough and coarsely wrinkled; 
set tightly on cob. 

Marblehead. Refs. 61, 73, 74, 89, 91, 93, 168, 214, 

217, 236, 327, 328, 350, 397, 407, 408, 411, 412, 

425, 429, 441, 503, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 

532, 533, 535, 536, 537, 538, 545. Syns. Early 

Marblehead, Early Red Marblehead, Extra Early 

Marblehead, Marblehead Sugar, New " Cory." 

A selection from Early Narragansett, J. J. H. 

Gregory of Marblehead, Massachusetts, sent this out 

about 1880 as Marblehead Early, " the earliest variety 

of sweet corn cultivated." Descriptions and early 

advertisements testify to the similarity of this and 

Narragansett except for a few days difference in edible 

maturity. For 20 years this variety was widely grown 

and generally accepted as one of the earliest white sweet 

corns known. 

Plant moderately short, 4}>-5 feet; stalks rather stout. 
Tillers many, rather short, usually one-half as tall as central stalk. 
Foliage more or less tinged with purple. Tassel short, stiff. 
Ears borne low, 12-18 inches from the ground. Dry ears 6-7 x 
1 . - 1 ' 1 inches, slightly tapering; base slightly enlarged; rows 8, 
straight, usually paired. Kernels at dry stage red tinged to 
reddish flesh color, large, broader than deep; crown rounded; 
surface slightly wrinkled, often nearly smooth; set tightly on red 
cob. 



Maule's \\. Refs. 22, 91, 126, 238, 241, 350, 368, 
403, 411, 510, 515, 533, 537, 538. Syn. Maule. 

Wm. Henry Maule introduced this variety in 1888, 
although it was never featured by that organization 
until 1901. The introducer paints a glowing picture of 
the stock after which he says concerning its origin, 
" I first offered the corn to the public in 1888, and foi 
20 years before that time it had been the favorite sweet 
corn of the late Mr. Alfred Rose of Penn Yan, New 
York, one of the most successful market gardeners in 
the United States . . " The variety has been 

listed continually, although present-day stocks are 
considerably later in season than reports of the original 
stocks would indicate. 

Old accounts indicate that the plants were about 
4}4 to 5 feet tall, producing ears 7 to 8 inches long that 
contained 12 to 14 rows and reached edible maturity in 
about 80 days. At Geneva, however, the plants averaged 
about 1 foot taller and the ears 1 inch longer, reaching 
edible maturity in about 90 days. 

Mayflower. Refs. 21, 32, 230, 335, 525, 546. Syns. 
Earliest Mayflower, Early Mayflower, Extra 
Early Mayflower, Mayflower No. 2. 

This variety was developed and later introduced 
in 1912 by the Everett B. Clark Seed Co. of Milford, 
Connecticut. It was an early selection from Mam- 
moth White Cory and was very popular for several 
years among New England growers. Allen, Sterling, 
and Lathrop, Portland, Maine, listed it in their catalog 
of 1913 as an early variety that had commanded the 
utmost praise from all who had tried it. It was also 
listed by Beckets Seed Store in 1913 and shortly after 
by most eastern houses. It was largely used to replace 
Perry's Hybrid and was widely recommended by 
various Connecticut seed corn growers. After about 
15 years of popularity another selection, Early Sur- 
prise, largely took the place of Mayflower in sweet corn 
lists. 

At Geneva Early Mayflower came into production 
in 75 days, 5 days earlier than Mammoth White Cory, 
in season with Alpha, and 5 days later than Early 
Market. The plants are as tall as those of Mammoth 
White Cory, slightly heavier and more zigzag, whereas 
the ears are much alike with the tips more consistently 
abruptly tapered. Its earliness seems to be the most 
outstanding characteristic in comparison to Mammoth 
White Cory and responsible for its use as a home and 
market garden variety. 

Plant moderately short, 4 1 ; >-5 feet; stalks moderately slender 
and zigzag; nodes 7-8, prominent, exposed. Brace roots absent. 
Tillers few, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves moder- 
ately short and moderately narrow, 26-28 x 3-3' _. inches; sheath 
shorter than internode. Tassel medium long and slender, 15-18 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately erect, few, 
short and scattered; bracts green, sparsely striped with red, occa- 
sionally ringed at the base; anthers reddish bronze (terra cotta to 
vinaceous russet); 56—58 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Husk leaves moderately 
many, long and heavy. Husks medium in number, thick, short, 
and rather loosely wrapped. Husked ear medium long and moder- 
ately slender, 6-8 x 1 3 2— 1 5s inches; slightly tapering, partly 



50 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



cylindrical; rows 10-12, usually straight, occasionally somewhat 
irregular at base; crowded around cob; tip abruptly conical. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, shallow; at dry 
stage dull white, slightly broader than long, rather thick, 1.0 x 1.1 x 
.42 cm. 100 seeds per oz. I; nearly square; crown somewhat rough; 
surface sparsely and coarsely wrinkled, often deeply ridged; set 
tightly on cob. 

Melrose. Refs. 74, 207, 208, 405, 450, 452, 454, 503, 
515, 517, 518, 533. Syn. New Melrose. 

One of the earliest records of Melrose occurs in the 
1895 catalog of J. M. Thorburn and Company. It was 
listed by several other organizations and as far as can 
be determined was listed by Thorburn until 1912 and 
by Tait until 1918. 

Little definite information is available concerning 
the description of plant or ear. The editor's report of 
the Rural New-Yorker for 1897 is perhaps the most 
enlightening article regarding this sort. In this article 
Melrose is reported to have produced plants about the 
same height as the first earliest (at that time Cory, etc.), 
producing 2 ears per stalk which averaged 9 inches in 
length, possessing 12 rows. The kernels were medium 
size and were of better quality than any of the other 
first earlies. He concluded his article by saying, " It 
is the best sort of just its season, that we have tried." 

Metropolitan. Refs. 71. 139, 238, 241, 257, 329, 335, 
345, 403, 517, 518, 525, 533. Syns. Early Metro- 
politan, Improved Metropolitan. 

This eld sort introduced by Peter Henderson in 
1898 was seemingly well thought of during the 
succeeding 10 years. The original strain came from 
a Mr. Browning of Lake Waccabuck, New York. There 
were three serious defects to which early varieties of 
corn were susceptible, viz., weakness of plant, inferior 
flavor, and susceptibility to a fungus growth known as 
smut. In surmounting these defects Metropolitan out- 
classed its contemporary varieties and has continued as 
a great favorite on the market. 

At Geneva 92 days were required before Metro- 
politan came into production, which proved to be 4 
days earlier than Henderson, 6 days earlier than Stowell's 
Evergreen, and 4 days later than Howling Mob. The 
plants are 1 } o feet shorter than Henderson, have a 
greater tendency to tiller, and are less streaked with red 
on the tassels. The husked ears are shorter, not as 
plump, and have 2 to 4 less rows of kernels. In the 
dry stage the kernels are not as long in proportion to 
the breadth as those of Henderson, but otherwise are 
much alike. 

Plant moderately tall, 6,' -r-1 feet; stalks straight, medium 
heavy; nodes 10-12, usually covered, not very prominent. Brace 
roots present, rather heavy, whorl complete on one node, useful. 
Tillers moderately many, about J :; shorter than central stalk. 
Leaves long and medium broad, 34-36 x 3 ' 2-4 inches, rather heavy 
and coarse; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately erect to 
horizontal; medium long, moderately many and crowded; bracts 
variable, although usually dark green, striped with a lighter shade; 
anthers buff ^chamois i; 74-76 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present. Shank variable, rather heavy. Husk 
leaves few, rather long and narrow, light. Husks many, heavy, 
moderately long, tightly WTapped and difficult to remove. Husked 



ear moderately long and moderately plump, 8-9 x 1 3 4~2 inches, 
slightly tapering; base slightly enlarged and compressed; tip rather 
abruptly conical and slightly exposed; rows 10-12, straight, regular, 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, medium width and shallow; 
at dry stage short, thick and narrow, .96 x 1.1 x .43 cm. (120 seeds 
per oz. !; nearly square; crown moderately rounded; surface abund- 
antly but rather shallowly wrinkled; set moderately tight on cob. 

Mexican Wonder. Refs. 345, 492. Syn. New Mexican 
Wonder. 

This variety was a chance hybrid, involving Black 
Mexican and an unknown white, developed by A. L. 
Mogle of Wilkinson, Indiana. Stark Brothers of Louisi- 
ana, Missouri, who introduced the variety about 1929 
mention the fact that the variety was grown by the 
originator in its mixed condition for 15 years before 
it was listed by them. The mixture, consisting of both 
white and bluish-black kernels, continued to be present 
to 1931 when the variety was discontinued. It was 
handicapped, of course, by the appearance of the dark 
kernels when left too long before using, and although of 
good quality, in this respect was accorded the same 
reaction reiterated in the discussion of Black Mexican 
and Pickaninny. 

Eighty-two days were required to produce edible 
ears, which proved to be 4 days earlier than Black 
Mexican. The plants were slightly shorter and more 
bushy in appearance, due to shorter internodes and the 
consequent greater number of leaves, as well as the 
presence of numerous husk leaves. The husked ears 
differ from those of Black Mexican in possessing more 
rounded tips, often more rows, narrower kernels, and 
larger cobs. 

Midget. Refs. 58, 348, 504. Syns. Bantam Crosby, 
Chinese Midget. Illus. 25, 49. 

This is the only miniature sweet corn in all the 
long list of varieties. It has been in use on private estates 
for many years where it was generally known as Midget 
and only recently has it been listed in catalogs. Joseph 
Breck & Sons of Boston call it Bantam Crosby and 
have so carried it since 1923. Stumpp & Walter first 
listed it as Midget in 1924. We have been unable to 
trace the origin of this variety and our search has followed 
one trail from estate to estate across Long Island up 
along the New England Coast to Brookline and Groton, 
Massachusetts, and across the line into New Hampshire. 
It has been grown on many of the finest private estates 
in the country, including " Holmlea " developed by the 
late Prof. C. S. Sargent of Brookline. 

In a few places where it has been grown it has been 
known as Chinese Midget. This might indicate an 
Asiatic origin. It is wholly distinct and there is nothing 
like it among cultivated varieties of sweet corn. The 
variety New Queen as described in 1889 showed some 
similar characteristics, but since this variety was soon 
lost no direct comparison could be made. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 78 days, 
in season with Honey Dew, and 3 days later than Alpha. 
The plants are 1 } ■> to 2 feet shorter than those of Honey 
Dew, are more inclined to tiller, and have more red 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



51 



coloration on the foliage. The ears are 2 to 2 l £ inches 
shorter and less tapering. Although of no commercial 
value, its distinct foliage color and its uniformity in size 
and shape of plants render it an attractive addition to 
any home garden. It remains in the edible stage a very 
short time but when harvested at the correct stage the 
kernels are exceedingly sweet, tender, and meaty. 

Plant very short and bushy, 2'_.-2 :! i feet; stalks slender and 
straight; nodes 7-8, not prominent; internodes short, slender and 
straight, exposed portions shaded solid red over the entire surface. 
Brace roots absent. Tillers decidedly many present, slightly 
shorter than the central stalk. Leaves short and narrow, 18-20 
x 2 ' _-3 inches; midrib narrow, deep pink to light red, prominent; 
sheath equal to and occasionally longer than internode. Tassel 
very slender and short, 9-10 inches, nearly solid red; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, many, very short and crowded; 
bracts dark greenish red, heavily striped with deeper red, ringed 
with red at the base; anthers yellow Ipinard yellow), very uniform; 
55-56 days to anthesis; period between tassel emergence and 
pollen shed fully a week, much longer than with most varieties. 

Ears borne at 2nd, 3rd and 4th nodes, two and occasionally 
three ears per stalk, with additional nubbins on tillers. Shank 
short and slender, 1 ' _>— 2 inches; husk leaves few, short and dis- 
tinctly descending. Husks few, thin, short, tightly wrapped but 
easily removed, with exposed portions dull red. Silk short, scanty 
and uniformly greenish yellow in color. Husked ear short and 
slender, S'j-t'^ x 1— lji inches, somewhat cylindrical and slightly 
tapering; base compressed; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 8, 
usually regular and straight except when extreme crowded condition 
renders them otherwise, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, thin and shallow; at dry 
stage dull white, short, medium breadth and very thin, .89 x .86 x .32 
cm. 1,176 seeds per oz.); somewhat triangular in shape; crown dis- 
tinctly rounded; surface finely and abundantly wrinkled; set mod- 
erately tight on cob. 

Minims' Hybrid. Ref. 245. 

This variety was introduced in 1912 by Joseph Harris 
Co., Coldwater, New York, after they had secured seed 
from J. W. Mimms, a local farmer. Mr. Mimms selected 
this corn out of Perry's Hybrid, and since the latter had 
a red cob and kernel cf a red character, it becomes evi- 
dent that Mimms' Hybrid resulted as a natural cross or 
mechanical mixture of some sort. The good qualities 
of Perry's Hybrid, large size, earliness, and productive- 
ness, are reproduced in this corn which the Harris 
Company has maintained as a sort well suited to central 
New York. 

Ninety days were required for edible ears to be 
produced at Geneva. This was 2 days earlier than 
Metropolitan, in season with Quincy Market, and 2 days 
later than Howling Mob. Plants are about the same 
size as those of Metropolitan, with tassels slightly 
longer, much more slender and delicate, with lateral 
spikelets more drooping. The husked ears are 1 to 
2 inches longer, more nearly cylindrical and have 
2 to 4 more rows of kernels. Kernels in the dry stage 
are slightly smaller and are set more tightly on the cob. 
Mimms' Hybrid is well adapted for the market gardener, 
the canner, and the home gardener and is used to some 
extent in this state with considerable success. It is, 
however, of only localized importance as few seedsmen 
list it. The ears are very attractive and quite uniform, 
so that the variety, were it not for the general decline 



of interest in all white varieties, has potential possibilities 
of becoming a leader. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6' 2 feet; stalks moderately slender 
and straight; nodes 10-11, usually covered, not prominent, slightly 
streaked with red at the base. Brace roots present, useful, whorl 
complete on one and occasionally two nodes. Tillers many, slightly 
shorter and occasionally equal to stalk. Leaves medium long and 
medium broad, 30-32 x 3J^— 4 inches; sheath equal to and occa- 
sionally shorter than internode. Tassel long and slender, 22-24 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets slightly drooping, 
many, long, and crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped with light 
red; anthers somewhat variable in color; 70-73 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne on 4th and 5th nodes, often two ears per stalk. 
Shank variable in length, 4-8 inches, heavy. Husks short, rather 
heavy, tightly wrapped and rather difficult to remove. Husked 
ear long and moderately plump, 9-10 x lj >,-2 inches, slightly taper- 
ing and partly cylindrical, attractive; base usually compressed 
but occasionally somewhat open; tip abruptly conical to nearly 
rounded, slightly exposed and occasionally capped; rows 12-14, 
straight, regular, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, rather narrow; at 
dry stage opalescent white, slightly wider than long, thick, .92 x .98 
x .40 cm. (140 seeds per oz.); nearly square; crown slightly rounded; 
surface abundantly and rather finely wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Money Maker. Ref. 316. 

The D. Landreth Seed Co., Bristol, Pennsylvania, 
offered Money Maker for the first time in 1916. Although 
we find no record of its being listed by any other seed 
company, it appears to be distinct and to have con- 
siderable merit. Landreth described it originally as a 
variety " with a combination of earliness, size, pro- 
ductiveness, and most unexampled quality of a most 
exquisite flavor." 

Ninety-nine days were required for Money Maker to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 1 or 2 days 
later than Stowell's Evergreen, in season with Broad 
Grained and Oregon Evergreen, and 1 day earlier than 
Mammoth Sugar. The plants are equal in height to 
those of Oregon Evergreen, are more inclined to tiller, 
and have a more bushy tassel with anthers buff colored 
instead of red. The husked ears are slightly shorter 
than those of Oregon Evergreen and much more slender 
and more glistening. 

Plant tall, 7-7 ] ■> feet; stalk heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
usually covered, not prominent. Brace roots present and complete 
on one node, heavy and useful. Tillers decidedly many, equal to and 
occasionally slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately 
long and medium broad, 32-34 x J>},'r-^ inches; sheath longer than, 
but occasionally equal to internode. Tassel moderately long and 
heavy, 18-20 inches, bushy; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
nearly horizontal, very many, medium long and crowded; bracts 
green, rather sparsely striped with red; anthers reddish bronze 
(terra cotta to vinaceous russet); 77-78 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 6th to 8th nodes, often two ears per stalk with 
an additional nubbin present. Shank short and slender, 2-3 
inches. Husks moderately many, long and tightly wrapped. 
Silk rather scanty, short and easily removed. Husked ear moder- 
ately long and medium plump, 8-9 x \ h ,*-\~s inches, partly cylin- 
drical and very slightly tapering; base compressed; tip conical and 
slightly exposed; rows 12, straight, regular and attractive, crowded 
around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, glistening, medium size, shallow 
and rather thick; at dry stage dull white, medium width, slightly 
longer than wide, 1.1 x 1.3 x .32 cm. (148 seeds per oz.); triangular 
in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface abundantly and often 
finely wrinkled; set moderately loose on cob. 



52 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Moore's Concord. Refs. 18, 22, 49, 61, 73, 74, 89, 91, 

93, 121, 214, 236, 238, 241, 243, 278, 328, 329, 

370, 404, 405, 407, 408, 411, 414, 422, 423, 430, 

435, 441, 456, 487, 503, 507, 508, 510, 511, 512, 

514, 515, 516, 517, 532, 535, 536, 537, 538, 544. 

Syns. Concord, Early Concord, Early Concord 

Sugar, Early Moore's Concord, Early Moore's 

Concord Sweet, Extra Early Concord Sugar, 

Late Concord, Moore's Early, Moore's Late 

Concord. 

The following is quoted directly from the report 

of the Committee on Vegetables for 1870, published 

in Transactions of the Massachusetts Horticultural 

Society for 1867-71: 

" To Capt. John B. Moore of Concord, Mass., 
belongs the honor of originating this fine corn. It is a 
cross between Crosby's Early and Burr's Improved, 
two well known sorts ; the former the most popular early, 
and the latter considered the best late variety. It was 
first crossed in 1865 and again in 1867. Stalks strong, 
stocky and vigorous, from seven to seven and a half 
feet in height. Ears set rather low on the stalk, and 
having from twelve to sixteen, usually, and occasionally 
twenty rows on each ear. Color, when fit for the table, 
very white and handsome. Quality superior, not sur- 
passed by any other variety, being exceedingly tender 
and sweet. Size of ears, large, considerably larger than 
the Early Crosby, and superior to any other either for 
market or for family use, and very productive. It also 
matures earlier than any other variety of sweet corn 
of equal size, which will undoubtedly make it a very 
desirable sort for the market gardener. 

" Mr. Moore exhibited specimens of this Corn from 
his field planted in the open ground, well filled and in 
the best possible condition for the table, on the same day 
(July 23) as the Darling's Early was shown, a small 
eight-rowed variety heretofore considered the earliest 
Sweet Corn; the latter variety having the benefit of a [ 
start in pots in a frame or greenhouse, before planting 
out in the open ground. The first exhibition of Crosby's 
Early was made, July 30, by Josiah Crosby and Daniel 
Clark, so it will be seen that on the score of earliness 
Moore's Early Sweet Corn takes the lead. It was 
also shown by Mr. Moore at every subsequent exhibition 
during the season and at the Annual in September, in 
fine condition, and attracted more than usual attention. 

" Your Committee, deeming it a duty they owe to 
the public to obtain all the information in their power 
with regard to every new candidate for public favor, 
visited the grounds of Mr. Moore, and after going through 
his fine field, and making a careful examination of the 
same, would say that they returned more fully convinced 
than before of its value. The Society's Silver Medal 
was awarded Mr. Moore by your Committee." 

Needless to say, Moore's Concord became a very 
popular variety and was widely grown until soon after 
the turn of the century when other prize winners crowded 
out those older sorts. 



Moonarchie. Refs. 184, 241, 386, 483, 533. 

I. N. Simon & Son, Philadelphia, gives the place 
of origin of this variety in a section called Moonarchie, 
Essex County, New Jersey. The exact date of its 
introduction is not known, although the earliest data 
are that recorded by Tracy in 1902. J. F. Noll and 
Company of Newark, New Jersey, listed it at least 
since 1908 and continued it throughout the life of the 
company. The successors, Alexander Forbes and Com- 
pany, listed it for 1 year, discontinuing it in 1919. 
It was a late sweet corn, ready for eating about the 
same time as Stowell's Evergreen. It was reported to 
be a fine yielder, producing large well-filled ears 9 to 10 
inches long with 14 to 16 rows. 

Morning Dew. Ref. 543. Syns. Early Morning Dew, 
Vick's Morning Dew. 
This variety was introduced by James Vick's Sons 
of Rochester, New York, in 1920 as one of the largest 
extra early white sorts. At the time of its introduction 
and for a few years later the stock was apparently one 
that produced plants somewhat smaller than ether 
varieties producing large ears. In recent years, how- 
ever, our trials at Geneva indicated that present stocks 
of this variety are so nearly like those of Whipple's 
Early White that the two are inseparable. This is in 
agreement with data that show plant height and vigor, 
ear size and shape, together with time of maturity of 
the two named varieties to be practically, if not entirely, 
identical. 

Narragansett. Refs. 13, 14, 22, 52, 61, 73, 89, 91, 93, 
126, 168, 214, 236, 240, 309, 397, 404, 407, 408, 
411, 422, 423, 424, 429, 503, 507, 508, 535, 536, 
537, 538, 544. Syns. Early Narragansett, Early 
Dwarf Narragansett, Early Red Narragansett, 
Extra Early Narragansett, Extra Early Narra- 
gansett Sugar. 
Narragansett appeared in the catalogs as a named 
variety about 1860, a new type of cultivated sweet corn 
with reddish to red kernels and red cob. Earliness in 
sweet corn was the chief character sought by seedsmen at 
that time. This variety was handicapped by several 
unfavorable characteristics; rather unattractive ears, 
having a strong tendency to openness between pairs of 
rows, flat kernels of varying color, and worse yet, when 
the ears were a trifle old or improperly cooked, the color 
of the cooked corn was quite dark. 

No clue as to its origin has been unearthed, unless a 
reference to a variety grown by the Mandan Indians 
with somewhat similar characteristics might indicate a 
relationship. This variety had seed red brown when 
hard and dry and a white cob with a red ring about the 
edge of the pith, but when picked at the roasting stage 
the kernels were a light amber. 

Plant moderately short 4'2-5 feet, stalks slender. Tillers 
few, hardly half as tall as central stalk. Ears borne low, 16-20 
inches from the ground, 6-7 '_> x 1'_>-1 : 's inches; nearly cylindrical 
with tip distinctly tapering; rows 8, distinctly paired, regular and 
straight: furrows deep and often rather broad. Dry kernels light 
flesh-tinge to dark red, rather large, broader than deep, 103 seeds 
per oz. '; crown rounded: surface wrinkled: set tightly on red cob. 




NARROW GRAINED EVERGREEN 



(Three-quarters natural size) 




NE PLUS ULTRA 



(Three-quarters natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



53 



Narrow Grained Evergreen. Refs. 89, 91, 93, 124, 
316, 318, 344, 367, 368, 535, 536, 562. Syns. 
Improved Narrow Grain Evergreen, Long Nar- 
row Grained Evergreen, Maine Style Evergreen. 
Ulus. 25, 52. 
This sweet corn, developed by the Everett B. 
Clarke Seed Company, Milford, Connecticut, and 
introduced in 1904, soon established itself as a splendid 
high-quality Evergreen. Of all the Evergreen family 
this stock, which was bred from Stowell's Evergreen, 
has the narrowest, deepest kernels with nearly twice 
the number of rows. In some sections it is known 
as Evergreen, Maine Style, deriving the name because 
of its use by Maine canners. A very similar or identical 
stock was worked up by S. F. Leonard at the La Grange, 
Illinois, farm of the Leonard Seed Company of Chicago. 
This strain is known today as Leonard's Narrow Grain 
Evergreen. 

Ninety-eight days were required for this variety to 
reach edible maturity at Geneva. This was in season 
with Stowell's Evergreen, 4 days later than Improved 
Giant, and 2 days earlier than Mammoth. Plants are 
much like those of Stowell's Evergreen, possibly slightly 
heavier, with less tendency to tiller and with somewhat 
lighter tassel. The husked ears are the same size, more 
tapering, and contain 6 to 8 more rows of kernels. 
Kernels are decidedly more narrow and usually more 
regular in appearance. In the dry stage they lack the 
converging crown of Stowell's Evergreen, and as a 
whole, are more uniformly arranged. The variety is 
used extensively by the canning industry and has 
brought much favorable comment because of its uni- 
formity and attractiveness of the fine kerneled ears. 
Within recent years this has been one of the varieties 
with which considerable progress has been made in 
breeding hybrid-inbred strains. 

Plant tall, 7 1 _>-8 1 2 feet; stalks heavy and straight: nodes 
12-14, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present on 1st and 
2nd nodes, heavy, first whorl complete and useful. Tillers very 
few, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves long and moder- 
ately broad, 32-34 x 3j£-4 inches; sheath equal to and longer than 
internode. Tassel long and very heavy, 20-22 inches; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, many, 
long, and rather crowded; bracts green, rather sparsely streaked with 
red; anthers variable in color; 72-74 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 6th and 7th nodes, two ears per stalk with an 
occasional nubbin present. Husks moderately many, heavy, 
moderately short and loosely WTapped. Silk moderately long and 
abundant, pale red to amber. Husked ear moderately long and 
plump, 8-9 x 2 J.j-2 1 j inches, decidedly tapering, base enlarged and 
compressed; tip conical and exposed; rows 18-24, usually regular, 
straight, very crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white; small, very narrow and deep; 
at dry stage, opalescent white, very narrow, long and thin, 1.41 x 
.60 x .23 cm. 216 seeds per oz.i; long triangular in shape; crown 
usually straight across; surface rough, usually deeply creased, 
otherwise very coarsely but deeply wrinkled and pitted; set very 
loose on cob. 

Ne Plus Ultra. Refs. 22, 23, 65, 73, 74. 75, 78, 90, 91, 
94, 95, 96, 97, 121, 126, 164, 188, 218, 221, 238, 
241, 275, 290, 293, 328, 329, 335, 350, 367, 368, 
382, 397, 404, 405, 406, 411, 419, 445, 447, 448, 
449, 453, 455, 498, 503, 507, 508, 510, 511, 512, | 



513, 514, 518, 532, 533, 535, 536, 537, 538, 545. 
Syns. Banana, Epicure, Hawaii, Improved Ne 
Plus Ultra, Little Gem, Mammoth Early Epicure, 
Pure Improved Ne Plus Ultra, Quaker, Quaker 
Sweet, " Shoe Peg," Zig Zag. Illus. 53. 
The original seed of this variety is said to have 
been grown by a family in New Jersey and held closely 
by them for many years prior to 1882, at which time 
Burpee secured part of the stock and named it Ne 
Plus Ultra. In a catalog issued by Gregory in 1876 
a variety called Quaker Sweet Corn was listed under 
the new or rare vegetables. This variety was described 
as late, " the sweetest white variety I have yet found. 
Kernels resemble closely Stowell's Evergreen." The 
latter listing by Gregory was not repeated until 1890 
when he says in connection with Ne Plus Ultra (Quaker 
Sweet Corn) " Under this latter name I introduced to the 
public, a number of years ago, a variety of sweet corn, 
since called ' Ne Plus Ultra ' which Latin name trans- 
lated into English would read ' The unsurpassable corn.' " 
The original source of this first " broken row " 
variety must for the present remain unknown. The 
writers have been unable to find an Indian corn which 
might have been the foundation stock. It is most 
probable that the type resulted as a chance sport or 
natural cross between two unknown varieties. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 95 days, 
2 days earlier than Country Gentleman and 8 days 
earlier than Cincinnati Market. The plants were 
slightly shorter than those of Country Gentleman, 
tassels somewhat shorter both in terminal and lateral 
spikelets. The husked ears were 2 to 3 inches shorter 
and somewhat more slender, otherwise they were very 
similar. 

Plant tall, 6-7 feet; stalks slender, pale green foliage; tassel 
short and bushy; lateral spikelets numerous, short and stiff. 

Ears borne rather low, 18-20 inches from the ground; husked 
ears moderately short and medium plump at the base, 6-7 x l 3 4-lj^ 
inches, tapers decidedly to a point at the tip; rows entirely lacking. 
Silk abundant and long, difficult to remove. Kernels at milk stage 
white, small, narrow; at dry stage pale whitish amber, very thin 
and translucent, small, much longer than wide (215 seeds per oz.); 
cuneate; crown straight; surface wrinkled, often dimpled; set 
loosely on cob. 

Nectar. Refs. 190, 345, 502. 

This new " early " sweet corn was offered to the 
customers of the Ford Seed Company of Ravenna, Ohio, 
in 1907 for the first time. Nectar was originated by 
Hamilton De Graw of New York and was developed as 
the result of a cross between Malakhoff and White Ever- 
green. Nectar is of good quality and is a long standing 
sort, a character which it probably retained from its 
Evergreen parent. 

At Geneva Nectar came into production in 94 days, 
4 days earlier than Favorite and Stowell's Evergreen 
and 6 days later than White Cory. The variety most 
resembles Favorite, being of equal height, but retaining 
much less tendency to tiller. The ears are borne lower 
on the stalk and are inclined to be decidedly more pend- 
ant. The husked ears are 1 to 2 inches shorter, more 
cylindrical and more plump, containing 12 rows rather 



54 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



consistently. The variety is one of the lesser known 
sorts which has potential possibilities as a valuable 
main crop market garden sort. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
slightly exposed, not very prominent. Erace roots present, heavy, 
useful, and complete whorl on one node. Tillers few, slightly 
shorter than central stalk. Leaves long and medium broad, 
36-38 x 3 1 £-4 inches; sheath equal to and slightly shorter than 
internode. Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches, 
coarse; terminal spike slightly drooping; lateral spikelets horizontal 
to slightly drooping, moderately many and rather crowded; bracts 
green, very slight to no red stripe present; anthers variable in color; 
70-72 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and very often two 
ears per stalk. Shank variable in length, rather slender, often 
pendant. Husks many, rather heavy, short, tightly wrapped and 
difficult to remove. Husked ear moderately long and medium 
plump, 8-9 x 1 •' s -l ~ s inches; slightly tapering; base slightly enlarged 
and compressed; tip abruptly conical and slightly exposed to 
occasionally capped; rows 12, straight, occasionally somewhat 
irregular at base and medial, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium width and moderately 
deep; at dry stage distinctly whitened, opaque, medium size, slightly 
longer than broad, rather thin, 1.15 x .1 x .35 cm. (100 seeds per 
oz. i; triangular; crown nearly straight; surface abundantly and 
rather deeply wrinkled; set rather loosely on cob. 

New Early. Refs. 184, 185, 387. Syns. Forbes Early, 
Forbes New Early. 
Introduced in 1912 by J. F. Noll and Company 
of Newark, New Jersey, this large second early is 
still distributed by Alexander Forbes and Company 
of the same city. Edible ears were produced in 83 
days, 2 to 3 days later than Vanguard and Whipple's 
Early White. As grown at Geneva it proved to be 
one of the most vigorous of its class. The plants 
were about 1 foct shorter than these of Vanguard 
and Whipple's Early White with shorter leaves and 
equal minimum tendency to tiller. The husked ears 
were the same size as those of Whipple's Early White 
with less tendency to taper. 

Plant medium tall, 5 to 6 feet; tillers few, considerably shorter 
than central stalk. Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, usually but 
one ear, occasionally an additional nubbin. Husked ear medium 
long and moderately plump, 7-8 x l"s-2 inches; slightly tapering; 
rows 12-16, straight and regular. Kernels at milk stage white, 
rather narrow and medium deep; at dry stage dull amber white; 
small, short and thick. Surface rather coarsely and shallowly 
wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

New Queen. Refs. 22, 274, 367, 368, 509. Syns. New 
Queen Sweet, Queen. 

Fortunately, an account cf this rather unique 
variety was included in the Annual Report of this 
Station for 1889. Although nothing is known regard- 
ing the origin and consequent introduction, J. A. Everitt 
of Indianapolis was one of the earliest houses to carry 
it. Verification of this must necessarily fall to R. L. 
Taft of the Michigan Experiment Station, who indi- 
cated the above source in his report of the variety. 

C. E. Hunn of this Station described New Queen 
in his account of the variety as a very dwarf grower, 
producing stalks about 4 feet tall, tinged with red. The 
ears were 5 to 6 inches long and possessed 8 rows of large 
white kernels which reached edible maturity in 79 days. 
This suggests the possibility of New Queen being the 



precursor of our present day Midget, a variety whose 
origin is uncertain. The descriptions as well as season 
strongly indicate at least a surprising likeness. 

New Snowflake. Refs. 159, 287. Syns. Early Snow- 
flake, New Early Snowflake, White Snowflake. 

S. M. Isbell and Company of Jackson, Michigan, 
introduced this sweet corn in 1923. Information con- 
cerning its origin is unknown. Although the name 
Snowflake has been used previously, it has always 
referred to a field corn. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in about 80 
days. The plants were about 4 1 ■> feet tall, slender, 
moderately inclined to tiller, and produced ears at the 
fourth and fifth nodes. The husked ears were medium 
long and moderately slender, 7 to 8 x 1} o to 1"' g inches, 
possessing 10 to 12 rows of medium sized white kernels. 

New Wonder. Ref. 337. 

This is a new variety which was introduced in 1930 
by J. M. McCullough's Sons Company, Cincinnati, Ohio. 
The originator, W. W. Kessler of Madison, Indiana, had 
experimented with this stock for 35 years. The variety 
as represented in our trials presented several characters 
which differed markedly in comparison with the same 
characters of other varieties. The size of ear in relation 
to lateness of season and height of plant and the number 
of ears on a stalk and their high position on the stalk were 
outstanding and distinct. 

Ninety-seven days were required for New Wonder 
to produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 1 day 
earlier than Egyptian and Stowell's Evergreen and 2 days 
later than Henderson. The plants most resemble 
those of Egyptian but are slightly more slender. Both 
varieties produce the ears high, but New Wonder often 
produces three and four ears, some of them small, two and 
three nodes higher than those of Egyptian. The husks 
are slightly shorter but just as tightly wrapped and as 
difficult to remove. The husked ears are about the 
same length as those of Egyptian but decidedly more 
slender. In the dry stage the kernels are set tighter 
on the cob. The variety is little known, but coming 
as late as it does it provides a delicate, small, and tender 
kerneled sweet corn for the late home garden. 

Plant tall, 7 1 : >-8 feet; stalks moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 14-15, usually covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, 
moderately heavy, whorl complete on two nodes and partly on the 
third, useful. Tillers few to none, much shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves long and medium width, 34-35 x 3^1 inches; sheath 
longer than internode. Tassel medium long, 16-18 inches, heavy 
and rather coarse, occasionally streaked with red at the base; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly horizontal, medium 
long, many present, multi-branched and crowded; bracts green, 
very slightly striped with pale red, often entirely lacking: anthers 
buff I deep colonial buff); 75-76 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th nodes, two ears with an 
additional nubbin or two often present; shank short and slender, 
2-3 inches. Husk leaves variable in number, light and very short; 
husks medium in number, rather short, tightly wrapped and rather 
difficult to remove. Husked ear moderately long and slender, 
8-9 x l'j-l's inches, moderately tapering; base compressed; tip 
long, conical and exposed; rows 12, moderately straight, slightly 
irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, narrow and medium depth; 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



55 



at dry stage distinctly opalescent white, considerably longer than 
wide, thin; 1.2 x .87 x .33 cm. (160 seeds per ozj, triangular; crown 
distinctly rounded; surface rather coarsely ana shallowly wrinkled, 
occasionally creased; set moderately tight on cob. 

Nonesuch. Refs. 97, 121, 220, 238, 350, 352, 403, 412, 
454, 508, 512, 514. Syns. Clark's Early None- 
such, Maule's Nonesuch. 

This variety was the first new variety produced 
by C. S. Clark of Wakeman, Ohio. It was intro- 
duced in 1892 by Wm. Henry Maule of Philadelphia. 
An outstanding stalk was noticed by Mr. Clark in one 
of his growing seed crops (possibly Cory) and the 
specimen ear saved. By selection the corn known as 
Nonesuch was developed and sold to Maule. The 
variety is unique because cf the uniformly white grain 
and pink ear. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 93 days, 
8 days later than Red Cory, about the same season as 
Delicious and 3 days earlier than Henderson. The 
plants are 1 ' L > to 2 feet taller than those of Red Cory, 
considerably heavier, and have tassels slightly longer, 
both terminal and lateral spikelets. The amount of red 
on the foliage is about the same on both varieties with 
Red Cory being more consistent and uniform in this 
respect. The husked ears are 2 to 3 inches longer, more 
plump than those of Red Cory, and have 4 to 6 more 
rows of kernels. Kernels at the dry stage are nearly 
white instead of red as in Red Cory, but the cob is red. 
For all practical purposes, this eld variety is of no 
significance today. Those stocks that are available 
are too variable to be of much value. 

Plant moderately tall, 6J i— 7 feet; stalks moderately heavy 
and straight; nodes 10-12, covered, not prominent, streaked at 
base with red. Brace roots present, moderately heavy, whorl 
complete and useful on one node. Tillers few, slightly shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium broad, 32-34 
x 3'_.— I'j inches, often colored along the margin; sheath equal to 
and longer than internode, usually streaked with light red. Tassel 
moderately long and medium heavy, rather coarse, 18-20 inches, 
usually colored at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
horizontal to somewhat erect, moderately many, medium long, 
rather crowded and branched at the base; bracts and anthers 
variable in color: 73-74 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and Sth nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank medium length, 
3-5 inches, rather tough. Husks many, heavy, moderately long 
and often slightly streaked with pale red; somewhat variable in 
this respect. Husked ear moderately long and medium plump, 
8-9 x l' ! 4 -l"s inches, moderately tapering; base enlarged and 
expanded; tip long conical and exposed; rows 12-14, straight, 
occasionally somewhat irregular at the tip, moderately crowded 
around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white with a pinkish tint at the base, 
small, rather narrow and definitely shallow; at dry stage dull yellow- 
ish white, red glumes adhere to base; slightly longer than broad, 
1.0 x .94 x .42 cm. (120 seeds per oz.); short, broad, triangular in 
shape; crown rounded; surface shallowly and rather abundantly 
wrinkled; set slightly loose on red cob. 

Nonpareil. Refs. 75, 91, 121, 138, 338, 367, 368, 411, 

412, 440, 503, 537, 538. Syns. Stabler Early 

Pedigree, Stabler Extra Early Pedigree, Stabler's 

Nonpareil. 

This was a variety first offered by Henry A. Dreer of 

Philadelphia in 1894 and continued for the succeeding 6 



years. It was known also as Stabler's Nonpareil and the 
similarity of this name to Stabler's Early, a very popular 
variety, had much to do with influencing growers to try 
the Nonpareil. It was advertised as a second early of 
particular value to the canning trade. 

Plant tall, 7 8 feet; stalks heavy; tassel heavy, rather stiff. 
Ears 6-8 inches long, 1 ' ■> 2 inches in diameter; rows 12-14, regular. 
Dry kernels opalescent white, as broad as deep, medium size, 
wrinkled; reached edible maturity in 90-92 days. 

Nordheim. Refs. 470, 483, 530. Syns. Earliest Nord- 
heim, Early Nordheim, Extra Early Nordheim, 
Ihrig's Nordheim. 
The John A. Salzer Seed Company gives to Mr. 
Ihrig, a Minnesota gardener, credit for originating 
this variety. Ihrig claimed it was bred from Early 
Minnesota. The exact date of introduction is unknown, 
although as well as can be determined of the several 
companies that listed it, Thorburn was the first, featur- 
ing it in his 1910 catalog. He introduced it as " on 
the style of Minnesota but far exceeding that variety 
in earliness and productiveness." Reports indicate 
that the variety produced plants about 6 feet high, 
usually bore two ears about 8 inches long, possessing 
8 rows of broad, white grains. 

Northern Pedigree. Refs. 22, 73, 89, 90, 91, 95, 96, 
121, 125, 126, 172, 240, 367, 368, 397, 411, 412, 
437, 438, 440, 508, 511, 512, 514, 535, 536, 537, 
538. Syn. Pedigree. 

Northern Pedigree sweet corn was one of the items 
offered in the thirteenth regular Seed Distribution list of 
the Rural New-Yorker for 1887. William Falconer, a 
contributor to the columns of that paper, wrote in 1886 
" in quality it (Northern Pedigree) is unsurpassed for 
excellence by any other sweet corn I ever ate. Indeed, I'd 
as soon eat it uncooked as cooked." It was sold by Ferry, 
Thorburn, and Gregory until about 1895. The early 
history of the variety is not definitely known; the fol- 
lowing account, however, was published in the Rural 
New-Yorker in 1886 as a direct quotation from the 
originator : 

" I can give no history of the Northern Pedigree 
Sweet Corn, except that for many years it has been a 
favorite early variety in my family. I do not know 
where it first came from as the time is beyond my 
remembrance. For at least 25 years the earliest and 
best formed ears have been saved for stock. This has 
resulted in securing the sweetest and most perfectly 
formed ears of any early sugar corn known." 

Plant moderately short, 4— 4 ] 2 feet; stalks very slender; 
foliage scanty and short; tassel short, stiff and simple; tillers very 
few. Ears borne low, 8-12 inches from the ground, usually two 
ears per stalk. Husked ears moderately short and slender, 5-6 
x 1 J-4— 1 ' i inches, moderately tapered; base usually enlarged and 
slightly expanded; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 8, nearly 
straight, pairs somewhat noticeable at the base, otherwise crowded 
around the cob. Kernels at milk stage white, rather broad and 
shallow; at dry stage amber white, broader than long, medium size; 
broad ovate; crown rounded; surface slightly wrinkled, often nearly 
smooth; set tightly on cob. 



56 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Old Colony. Refs. 22, 87, 89, 90, 91, 93, 121, 126, 137, 
171, 214, 238, 241, 274, 313, 341, 342, 343, 344, 
350, 397, 404, 411, 417, 418, 433, 507, 508, 510, 
511, 512, 513, 514, 515, 517, 532, 533, 535, 536. 
Syns. Early Old Colony, " Landreth Sugar," Old 
Colony Sugar, Sonyea Intermediate. 
So far as the published records of sweet corns 
are concerned, Old Colony is indeed one of the earliest 
known varieties. Its history was carefully noted and 
most graciously publicized by a communication from 
the originator, the Rev. A. R. Pope, Somerville, Massa- 
chusetts, in the Magazine of Horticulture of December 
1850. After nearly a century since its introduction 
there can be no improvements nor corrections on the 
story of the early struggles of the variety to gain stability 
and fame. The following is quoted directly from the 
original of 1850: 

" It is a hybrid, as one can readily perceive by 
inspection, from the Southern White, and the common 
sweet corn of New England; and exhibits certain char- 
acteristics of the two varieties combining the size of 
the ear and kernel, and productiveness of the southern, 
with the sweetness and tenderness of the northern 
parent ; ■ — a southern head, rara avis, with northern 
principles. Indeed, nature seems to have rewarded the 
effort to improve her productions, by giving more than 
an even share of the desirable qualities for table use. 
" The process by which it was attained will date 
as far back as 1845, when a single kernel, which escaped 
the denizens of the barnyard, was carried with the 
compost to my garden in Kingston, (Old Colony) and 
springing up was permitted, for the novelty to develop 
its nature in a huge stalk, bearing upon it, more or 
less matured, five ears of corn, one of the ears having 
18 rows. The productiveness, combined with the 
extraordinary size of the ear and kernel, suggested the 
plan of seeding the cob, when better acclimated, with 
sweet corn. 

" In 1846 and again in 1847, a few hills were planted 
and in the later year at the proper time, before the 
anthers had burst, the stamens or spindles were care- 
fully removed. As soon as the pistils or silk seemed in 
a mature state, the opening stamens of sweet corn stalks 
were carefully brought and the pollen from them gently 
shaken upon the pistils. At the time of harvesting 
more than one-half of the kernels bore all the ordinary 
outward appearances of sweet corn and had the sweet- 
ness peculiar to that variety." 

Here is the definite story of crossing sweet corn upon 
field corn. Selection of the sweet corn kernels was 
followed by planting and careful observation of the 
resulting plants which proved to be quite variable in 
height and vigor. Seed was saved from the few plants 
that seemed to take the middle course between the 
dwarfs and the giants. In 1849 a new sweet corn was 
completed and with what satisfaction, having practically 
no competition all the superlative adjectives could be 
used in a description of the variety. The editor of 
Horticulture commented on this wonderful new 
culinary vegetable with the following sentence: " Yet we 



see what good results have been obtained, simply by a 
little forethought, combined with a knowledge of the 
great effects of hybridization." 

Old Colony was truly one of the favorite varieties 
for the next 50 years, its long keeping quality, its gourd- 
seed shaped kernels, its sweetness, were only minor 
details in the general assembly of qualities that caused 
one writer to say " Old Colony of all varieties is my 
favorite for that ambrosial mixture called succotash." 

In catalog descriptions it was often reported that 
the variety was lost and found several times. This 
might possibly account for the separate listing by 
Sturtevant, who, in 1884, describes Clark's Old Colony 
as separate from the Old Colony given by Burr in 1863. 
Be that as it may, the name Old Colony represented a 
leading type for many years and has only faded away 
with the general decline of the white varieties. 

At Geneva Old Colony produced edible ears in 
90 days, 8 days earlier than Stowell's Evergreen, in 
season with Columbus Market, and 2 days later than 
Howling Mob. The plants were 1 to 1 l •> feet shorter 
than those of Stowell's Evergreen, but otherwise were 
very similar. The husked ears were 1 to 2 inches 
shorter but just as plump, while the kernels in the dry 
stage were not as deep as those of Stowell's Evergreen 
and lacked the converging crown. This sort was used 
for many years as a leading canning variety, but within 
the last 8 or 10 years has been replaced by others. Today 
it is practically impossible to obtain the true stock of 
Old Colony. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6j^ feet; stalks heavy and straight; 
tillers many, nearly as tall as central stalk. Tassel moderately 
long, lateral spikelets medium in number, moderately erect, long, 
rather scattered and multi-branched. Ears borne at 4th to 6th 
nodes, often two ears per stalk, occasionally an additional nubbin 
present. Husk leaves few, short and light; husks rather thin, 
moderately tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and plump, 
7-8 x 2 1 2 _ 2 :i 4 inches, partly cylindrical to slightly tapering; tip 
abruptly conical to rounded; rows 12-14, regular and moderately 
straight, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately broad, thick and deep; 
at dry stage amber white, rather large, (127 seeds to the oz.), 
longer than broad; triangular; crown slightly rounded; surface 
rather heavily wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Oregon Evergreen. Refs. 4, 5, 203, 295. Syn. Early 
Oregon Evergreen. Illus. 62. 

This member of the Evergreen family originated 
in Los Angeles County, California, and was first offered 
in 1904 by the Johnson and Musser Seed Company of 
Los Angeles. It has steadily increased in popularity 
and on the West Coast ranks in a comparative way with 
the standing of its cousin, Stowell's Evergreen, in the 
East. 

At Geneva this variety required 99 days to come 
into production, 1 day later than Stowell's Evergreen, 
in season with Long Island Beauty, and 4 days earlier 
than Cincinnati Market. Oregon Evergreen produces 
plants as tall as those of Stowell's Evergreen with tassels 
of equal length, but with decidedly more numerous and 
crowded lateral spikelets. The husked ears are slightly 
longer and more slender with a more decided taper. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



57 



The kernels in the dry stage are intermediate in width 
between Narrow Grain and Stowell's Evergreen, lack 
the converging crown, and are set more tightly on the 
cob. It is used more for late sweet corn on the Pacific 
Coast than any other variety. Its more tightly wrapped 
and longer husks give it greater protection against the 
com ear worm, a factor of great importance to the 
industry in that section. It is of little importance in 
other sections. 

Plant tall, 7-7 3 4 feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
covered, not prominent. Brace roots present and complete on 
one node, slender and useful. Tillers moderately many, slightly 
shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium 
broad, 32-34 x S 1 ^-^ inches; sheath longer than internode. Tassel 
moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, many, moderately 
long, crowded and usually multi-branched; bracts green, very 
sparsely striped with pale red; anthers buff colored (deep colonial 
buff to pinard yellow); 72-74 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank short and heavy, 2-3 inches. Husk leaves 
few and short. Husks many, moderately heavy, rather short, 
tightly WTapped, difficult to remove. Husked ear long and plump, 
9-10 x 2-2 ' v inches, moderately to decidedly tapering; base enlarged 
and compressed; tip conical, slightly exposed to occasionally capped; 
rows 14-16, moderately straight, occasionally somewhat spiral and 
lost at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, rather narrow and 
medium depth; at dry stage dull white, longer than wide, medium 
size, 1.04 x .84 x .40 cm. (124 seeds per oz. ); triangular in shape; 
crown slightly rounded; surface abundantly and often very finely 
wrinkled; set slightly loose on cob. 

Papoon. Ref. 427. 

This was the name given to the corn brought 
to Plymouth, Massachusetts, in 1779 by Lieut. Richard 
Bagnol, and is the first recorded sweet corn cultivated 
by the white settlers. It came from the valley of 
the Susquehanna in New York State at the time of 
the expedition against the tribes of the Six Nations 
under the command of General Sullivan. The color 
of the cob of this corn was called " a bright crimson," 
but the color of the dry seed was not given. C. N. 
Bement, writing in 1853, says of this early Plymouth 
corn, " There are two kinds of corn; one with the cob 
red and the other with the cob white. The ears are 
short and usually contain eight rows, the grains of which, 
when mature, are of a light color and become shrivelled 
and appear as if they were unripe." This must serve 
as a description of the first recorded variety of sweet 
corn of our civilization. It came from the Indian 
farmers of the fertile lands of up-state New York and 
was the forerunner of other varieties which came from 
the same or other Indian sources. From these native 
sweet corns and by crosses of these with the original 
Indian varieties of field corns have come the hundreds of 
named forms contained in this volume. 

Pee and Kay. Refs. 22, 73, 74, 89, 91, 94, 95, 96, 121, 

350, 368, 397, 411, 503, 508, 510, 511, 512, 533, 

536, 537, 538. Syn. Western Queen — Shumway. 

Price and Knickerbocker's Pee and Kay, named for 

the initials of the partners of this seed company, was 

introduced about 1885. This Albany seed company 

was responsible for several important sweet corn varieties, 



and listed all of the leading sorts in their catalogs. 
On the market it proved to be very salable and hence 
popular with both farmer and market gardener. No 
historical information is available, but according to 
descriptions it belonged in the same group with Asylum. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 }/£ feet; internodes short. Ears 
medium long and plump, 6-8 x l :, 4 -2 inches; kernels large, nearly 
broad as long, very thick; about 85 days to edible maturity. 

Peep O'Day. Refs. 77, 158, 238, 241, 242, 284, 298, 
388, 406, 516, 517, 518, 533, 546. Syns. Improved 
Peep O'Day, Queen of the Earliest. 

As an early variety, Peep O'Day was at one time 
an important sort for the home and market gardener. 
Introduced in 1901 by Northrup, King and Company, 
it soon became popular in the Middle West. The 
name itself was rather catchy and well suited to adver- 
tising, for nothing, not even the " early bird," could 
be ahead of the " peep of day." In several catalogs, 
Burpee in 1909, Vaughan in 1919, the Dakota Improved 
Seed Company in 1913, the similarity of this variety 
and Malakhoff is especially noted. 

Eighty-four days were required for Peep O'Day 
to produce edible ears at Geneva. This proved to be 
4 days later than Whipple's Early, in season with 
Kendel's Early Giant, and 4 days earlier than Howling 
Mob. The plants are about 1 foot shorter than those 
of Kendel's Early Giant, nodes more consistently promi- 
nent, and tassel slightly shorter both in terminal and 
lateral spikelets. Husked ears are about the same 
length but slightly less plump and more tapering. 
Peep O'Day was for several years a popular early market 
and home garden variety. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5)2 feet; stalk moderately slender and 
straight; nodes 9-10, covered, not prominent. Brace roots not 
present. Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves 
medium long and moderately narrow, 28-30 x 3-3 }i inches; sheath 
equal to and often longer than internode, slightly streaked with red 
near the base. Tassel medium long and slender, 15-18 inches; 
occasionally streaked with red at the base; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, moderately many, 
rather short, crowded; bracts and anthers variable in color; 60-62 
days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank usually short and slender, 
2-4 inches. Husks moderately many, medium long, rather tightly 
wrapped but easily removed. Husked ear medium long and 
medium plump, 7-8 x lj j,— ! 7 8 inches; moderately tapering; base 
enlarged, slightly open; tip conical and exposed; rows 8-12, straight, 
regular, 8-rowed ears show rows noticeably paired; furrows deep 
and narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, rather shallow and 
medium wide; at dry stage medium size, slightly longer than wide, 
.92 x 1.0 x .38 cm. 1 140 seeds per oz.); triangular in shape; crown 
slightly rounded; surface, moderately abundant, coarse and shal- 
lowly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Perfection. Refs. 22, 30, 273, 328, 370, 401, 403, 444, 
485, 529. 
The name " Perfection " has been used for several 
strains or stocks of sweet corn. Among others we 
have noted the following: Thorburn's Early White 
Perfection, 1908; Low's Perfection, 1892; Scott's Early 
Perfection, 1913; White Perfection from Beckert, 1913; 
Perfection from Grey, 1914; Howard's Perfection, 1915; 



58 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Price and Reed's Perfection, 1913; Willet's Perfection, 
1914; and Perfection Early of Moore and Simon, 1907. 
These various stocks are not all available today and 
those grown in our trials were not consistent in type 
from year to year. The various catalog descriptions 
show variation from the 8-row type illustrated by 
Scott in 1913 to the 12 -row type known as Price and 
Reed's Early Perfection. 

Although the name Perfection would indicate a 
" supremely excellent " strain or stock or at least one 
" without defect or lack," we have been disappointed in 
our trials of varieties so named. It is said that " the 
best judges never pronounce a work of art perfect, 
because they always see ideal possibilities not yet 
attained." Perhaps, therefore, the name " Perfection " 
used for a variety, whether it be sweet corn, tomato, 
or what not, constitutes in itself a handicap, for all 
conditions under which a plant grows tend to make 
perfection exceedingly difficult cf attainment. 

Perry's Hybrid. Refs. 22, 48, 61, 73, 74, 89, 91, 93, 94, 
121, 126, 207, 208, 238, 241, 244, 274, 278, 312, 
329, 350, 368, 397, 403, 405, 411, 457, 503, 508, 
510, 511, 512, 518, 533, 535, 537, 538. Syns. 
Large Cob Sugar, Perry, Perry's Hybrid Early. 
This was an old variety originating in the East 
and rather favorably known from 1888 to the fore- 
part of the present century. There is no definite 
information of its history, although some authorities 
credit its origination to A. D. Perry of the Perry Seed 
Store (now F. H. Ebeling), Syracuse, New York. The 
occasional red or pink cob serves as a clue to the original 
cross which must have been between a white cob and 
a pink cob variety. The regular and well filled ears 
are attractive and there is still a call for the variety 
in certain sections. To fill these orders, a similar corn, 
but with white cob, known as Mayflower No. 2, is 
frequently used today. 

Plant medium tall, 5-6 feet; stalks moderately slender. 
Tassels slender, lateral spikelets drooping. Ears borne 20-30 inches 
from the ground. Husk leaves few, short and small. Husked 
ear moderately long and medium plump, 8-10 x lj g— ljg inches, 
partly cylindrical and slightly tapering; tip sharply conical; rows 
8—10, often slightly irregular and separated at the base, otherwise 
crowded around cob. Kernels at milk stage dull white to pinkish, 
kernels rather broad and shallow; at dry stage dull yellowish white, 
large, broader than long; broad ovate; crown distinctly rounded; 
surface moderately wrinkled. 

Pharaoh's Dream. Refs. 238, 241, 282, 406. 

The Iowa Seed Company of Des Moines introduced 
this variety in 1903. No records are available to indi- 
cate the exact parentage, although it was supposed to 
have originated " from a cross made of two well known 
varieties and selected for a number of years until it had 
attained its high value." 

The variety has been featured by the introducers 
continuously, although so far as is known, it has not 
been carried by any other leading seedsmen, at least 
under this varietal name. Although the introducers 
exploited the idea of Pharaoh's Dream of a stalk pos- 
sessing seven ears, reports from experiment stations as 



early as 1906, as well as records obtained at Geneva, 
indicate nothing unusual in respect to this character. 
Trials at Geneva show the variety capable of pro- 
ducing plants 7 to 8 feet tall, with a decided tendency 
to tiller, bearing 1 to 2 ears per stalk which reach edible 
maturity in 97 days. The husked ears are 8 to 9 inches 
long, moderately plump, and possess 12 to 14 rows of 
medium sized, white kernels. 

Pickaninny. Refs. 156, 298, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 
335, 345, 348, 571. Syn. Early Pickaninny. 

In the year 1916, Thos. A. Peters of Hampton, New 
Brunswick, sent to the Horticultural Division of the 
Central Experimental Farm at Ottawa some seed of a 
black sweet corn. In 1918, after 2 years' trial to deter- 
mine its comparative earliness, it was crossed with Sweet 
Squaw, the latter being the seed parent. The black corn 
from New Brunswick was thought to have originated as 
a natural cross between Black Mexican and a corn native 
in that district. 

From the cross made by Arthur J. Logsdail in 1918 
the best black strain was selected, named Pickaninny in 
1919, and introduced in 1920. For several years it was 
not an entirely pure stock but continued selection cor- 
rected this. It was tried throughout Canada and met 
with considerable success and was found to be the 
earliest sweet corn ever grown at Ottawa, with the ex- 
ception of the original black variety which came from 
Mr. Peters. At many of the more northerly points in 
Canada it proved to be the first sweet corn that would 
mature its seed. 

Pickaninny produced edible ears at Geneva in 
69 days, the earliest of all sweet corn varieties. This 
was 1 day earlier than Aroostock Early and 6 days 
earlier than Alpha. The plants have a greater tendency 
to tiller than these of Black Mexican and are decidedly 
smaller in every respect, with darker green foliage. 
The husks are more loosely wrapped and the husked 
ears are much shorter and somewhat more slender. 
Approximately the same color change occurs with the 
kernels of both varieties. This variety has much the 
same quality as that of Black Mexican and is much 
earlier. Its small size, however, together with the lack 
of attractiveness in the post milk stage, has limited its 
usage to the home garden. Those who appreciate early 
sweet and tender corn in spite of unattractive color will 
find Pickaninny worthy of trial. 

Plant very short, 2} »— 3 feet; stalks straight and slender; 
nodes 5-6, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, very 
slender, somewhat useful, whorl not complete. Tillers many, 
much shorter than central stalk, some of which usually terminate 
with a nubbin. Leaves short and narrow, 15-18 x 2-2 ' _> inches; 
sheath longer than internode. Tassel very short and slender, 9-10 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly horizontal, few 
present, short and simple; bracts pale green, sparsely striped with 
pale red and ringed at the base with the same color; anthers uni- 
formly pale yellowish green (barium to citron yellow); 54—56 days 
to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one and often two or three 
ears per stalk; shank short and slender, 1-2 inches, moderately 
tough. Husk leaves few, short and light, often extending horizon- 
tally to the ear. Husks few, short, light, loosely wrapped and easily 
removed. Silk scanty, short, easily removed, uniformly pale green- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



59 



ish yellow in color. Husked ear moderately short and slender, 
5-6 x l'v-l'j inches; moderately tapering; base often open; tip 
conical, furrows deep and narrow; rows 8, paired rather noticeably, 
moderately straight, somewhat irregular at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage white, soon turning to various shades of 
gray and purple in the post milk period, thence to black in the full 
dough stage; small, moderately broad and shallow; in the dry 
stage black, small, broader than long, .81 x 1.06 x .37 cm. 1 1 52 seeds 
per oz. | ; short broad oval ; crown rounded ; surface abundantly 
wrinkled; set slightly loose on white cob. 

Pocahontas. Refs. 57, 225, 260, 335, 348. 

This variety, a selection from White Cob Cory, was 
introduced by Peter Henderson and Company, New 
York, who secured it from a New York gardener about 
1905 and offered it in their catalog of 1907. Pocohontas 
was obtained by the careful and painstaking effort of this 
gardener to whom earliness meant all. His work was 
eminently successful, for the variety had hosts of friends 
who grew it for their first crop corn. In 1916, the 
Joseph Harris Company offered a new Extra Early 
Pocohontas which reputedly was even earlier than the 
original. This variety has been particularly successful 
in the New England district when grown for the Boston 
Market. 

At Geneva 79 days were required to produce edible 
ears. This was 2 days later than Surprise, 4 days later 
than Early Mayflower, and 1 day earlier than Mammoth 
White Cory. Pocohontas was much like Surprise, 
although more inclined to tiller. The ears have much 
longer and heavier husk leaves and somewhat longer 
husks. The husked ears are slightly longer but other- 
wise are much the same. For all practical purposes 
the two are of similar utility, their use depending upon 
personal opinion as to their value in any given area. 

Plant moderately short, 4' £-4J4 feet; stalk slender, moderately 
straight; nodes 7-8, slightly exposed, moderately prominent. Brace 
roots not present. Tillers many, somewhat shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves medium long and narrow, 28-30 x 3-3 ' 2 inches; 
sheath usually shorter than internode. Tassel medium long and 
slender, 15-18 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets moder- 
ately erect, many, short, crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped 
with red; anthers variable in color; 60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one often a nubbin. Husk leaves moderately many, 
long and heavy. Husks moderately few, medium heavy, rather 
tightly wrapped, easily removed. Husked ear medium long and 
medium plump, 7-8 x 1 •'■ „ 1 :; j inches; moderately tapering, often 
partly cylindrical; base compressed; tip rounded to abruptly conical; 
rows 10-12, moderately straight, occasionally irregular at the base 
or inclined toward spiral arrangement. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium wide, thin and moderately 
shallow; at dry stage dull creamy white, slightly wider than long, 
small, .94 x 1.04 x .39 cm. 1 140 per oz.); short oval in shape; crown 
rounded; surface sparsely and very shallowly wrinkled; set tightly 
on cob. 

Portland Hybrid. Refs. 97, 238, 241, 388, 404, 503, 
513, 516, 533. Syn. Portland. 
Northrup, Braslan and Goodwin Company, Min- 
neapolis, Minnesota, cataloged a variety in 1893 as Port- 
land Hybrid. This evidently became known as Portland 
and continued as such to 1921) soon after the change in 
the firm name to Northrup King and Company. Other 
than the descriptions and photographs in early catalogs, 
we have no authentic information on this variety. 



Portland Market. Refs. 98, 204, 398, 400, 416. Syns. 
Early Portland Market, Superb. 

The Gill Bros. Seed Company, Portland, Oregon, 
introduced this variety in 1910 as the result of several 
years careful selection and breeding from the Ferry 
variety Oakview Market. For many years it was exceed- 
ingly popular with local growers and is still grown to some 
extent in the Pacific Northwest, but it is chiefly known 
today as the variety from which Early Market was 
selected. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 75 days. 
Five days later than Early Market, in season with Early 
Mayflower and Alpha, and 4 days earlier than Poco- 
hontas. Portland Market produces plants that are 
1 to 1 1 2 feet taller than those of Early Market, slightly 
heavier, much longer in tassel, and have decidedly 
greater tendency to tiller. The husks are longer but 
not quite as tightly wrapped. Husked ears will average 
an inch longer and are somewhat more slender. The 
rows are 2 to 4 less in number and the tip is less rounded 
and more exposed. 

Plant medium tall, 5-6 feet; stalks moderately slender and 
straight; nodes 9-10, exposed and prominent. Brace roots few 
present, very slender and of little use. Tillers many, equal to or 
slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately short and 
medium broad, 25-28 x 3'_>-4 inches; sheath shorter than internode. 
Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to somewhat erect, medium long, 
many present, usually crowded; bracts and anthers variable in 
color; 58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one often a nubbin. Shank variable in length, 
rather heavy. Husk leaves moderately many, rather long, light 
and slender. Husks many, heavy, long and rather tightly wrapped. 
Husked ear medium long and medium plump, 7-8 x 1 '■'■ £— 1 7 \ inches; 
moderately tapering; base enlarged and moderately compressed, 
occasionally open; tip conical and exposed, glumes very long; rows 
10—12, moderately straight, occasionally somewhat irregular at 
the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, soon becoming creamy white, 
medium size, rather shallow; at dry stage amber white; slightly 
broader than long, thick, very prominent embryo extending to the 
crown, 1.0 x 1.08 x .46 cm. (88 seeds per oz. >; oval in shape, crown 
decidedly rounded to semicircular; surface rather abundantly but 
shallowly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Potter's Excelsior. Refs. 11, 22, 42, 51, 52, 59, 73, 
74, 89, 91, 121, 126, 162, 168, 214, 238, 241, 338, 
344, 350, 367, 368, 397, 403, 405, 411, 420, 431, 
435, 436, 444, 445, 464, 503, 507, 508, 512, 528, 
533, 535, 536, 537. Syns. Conqueror, Early Con- 
queror, Early Excelsior, Excelsior, Excelsior Sugar, 
Excelsior Sweet, Large Excelsior, Lucky Strike, 
New Excelsior, Potter, Squantum, Squantum 
Sugar, Squantum Sweet. 
The name Excelsior seems to have been the first 
used for this variety for it was listed by Thorburn 
as such in 1861. The name Potter's Excelsior seems 
to have been used first about 1878, but the earliest 
catalog reference we have is that of Gregory in 1882. 
Squantum as the name for this stock appeared about 
1884 and was used by both Henderson and Gregory. 
In a recent letter Edgar Gregory says, " We considered 
Squantum Sugar the same as Potter's Excelsior. It 



60 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



came from that variety and the difference was so slight 
it wasn't worth considering." 

There is the possibility that the name Excelsior 
belonged to an entirely distinct variety, but there has 
been no way to check these names as to type. Potter's 
Excelsior might have originated by selection from Excel- 
sior or, as suggested by S. M. Tracy, have resulted from 
a cross between Early Minnesota and " Old Asylum." 
From the early description as given by Sturtevant in 
1884 we quote the following: " Mr. Potter says he 
exercised a careful selection, saving seed from both good 
and poor ears in order to hold the type in which the 
kernels are almost too sugary. In Mr. Potter's strain 
the ear is often oval in section from the tenderness of 
kernels yielding to pressure of its weight." 

Potter's Excelsior produced edible ears at Geneva in 
97 days, 1 day earlier than Stowell's Evergreen, in 
season with Early Mammoth, and 3 days later than 
Delicious. The plants are much like Stowell's Ever- 
green, possibly somewhat more stocky with less tendency 
to tiller and with longer tassels. The husked ears are 
slightly longer and more tapering. The kernels at the 
milk stage are shallower and thicker than those of 
Stowell's Evergreen, while in the dry stage the con- 
verging crown of the latter is absent. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 12-14, 
usually covered, not prominent, internodes long. Brace roots 
present, heavy, useful and complete on one node. Tillers moderately 
few, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves decidedly long and 
medium broad, 36—38 x 3 ] _,— !'_■ inches; sheath equal to and often 
longer than internode. Tassel very long and medium heavy, 
24-28 inches, rather coarse; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
horizontal to slightly drooping, medium in number, very long, not 
crowded; bracts green, very sparsely striped with pale red; anthers 
variable in color: 73-76 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th to the 7th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank medium long, 4—5 inches, decidedly heavy. 
Husk leaves few, short and light. Husks many, long, heavy and 
tough, rather tightly wrapped, not very easily removed. Silk 
medium in amount, moderately long and uniformly pale red in 
color. Husked ear long and plump, 9-10 x 2 ' ^-2 ' 4 ' inches, moder- 
ately to decidedly tapering: base enlarged and usually compressed, 
occasionally somewhat open; tip conical and somewhat exposed; 
rows 16-18, moderately straight, occasionally lost at the medial. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, shallow and decid- 
edly plump; at dry stage opalescent white, somewhat longer than 
wide, 1.05 x .94 x .43 cm. (132 seeds per oz.); roughly triangular 
in shape: crown slightly rounded; surface exceedingly rough, deeply 
and abundantly wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Pratt's Early. Refs. 90, 91, 427, 507, 508. 

The description of this variety could well have been 
associated with the early Papoon corn of 1779. J. J. H. 
Gregory advertised Pratt's Early in 1874 as an acquisi- 
tion for marketmen, a first early to come in before Crosby, 
Moore's or Narragansett. The only description, from 
Sturtevant in 1884, shows it to be quite similar to Red 
River but with whitish kernels. Ears 5 inches long, 
8- to 10-rowed, usually tapering somewhat; kernels 
crinkled and strongly rounded. 

Prcmo. Refs. 46, 131, 143, 201, 238, 241, 266, 298, 324, 
335, 345, 348, 403, 406, 472, 518, 533, 546. Syns. 
Early Premo, Extra Early Premo, Holmes' 
Premo, Sixty-Day Premo. 



This new variety, named Premo at the time of 
its introduction in 1910 by the Holmes Seed Com- 
pany, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, had been in posses- 
sion of William Moody who lived on the river road 
near Harrisburg. His early corn topped the market 
and seed of the same was desired by many, but was 
rather difficult to obtain. Finally, as the story goes, 
Mr. Holmes offered Moody $1.00 per seed for 12 grains. 
The offer was accepted and this variety had its start. 
It was very popular for many years and was known 
as a 60-Day corn. Stocks sold as Premo today have 
in some cases proved to be far different from the original. 

Premo required 85 days to reach edible maturity 
at Geneva. This was in season with Cory, 3 days 
earlier than White Cory, and 5 days later than Whipple's 
Early. The plants were slightly taller than those of 
Cory, with more prominent nodes, but very similar 
in the tendency to tiller. The husked ears are of equal 
length, slightly more plump and more often produce 
10-rowed ears. The kernels are much whiter in the 
milk stage and when dry lack the reddish tinge common 
to Cory. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 ] 2 feet; stalks slender and straight; 
nodes 9-10, exposed, prominent. Brace roots present, whorl com- 
plete, useful. Tillers few to moderately many, slightly shorter 
than central stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium broad, 
30-32 x 3 1 2-3 :! 4 inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassel 
medium long, rather heavy, 16-18 inches; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets nearly erect, few, medium long, rather scattered; 
bracts dark green, heavily striped with dark red; anthers variable 
in color; 66-70 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, often two ears per stalk, 
one usually a nubbin. Shank moderately short and heavy, 2-4 
inches. Husks medium number, size and wrapping. Husked ear 
moderately short and slender, 6-7 x l'o-l's inches, slightly taper- 
ing; base compressed; tip conical, slightly exposed; rows 8-10, 
straight, regular, often noticeably paired. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, medium broad and shallow; 
at dry stage dull amber white, broader than long, thick, 1.x 1.26 x .45 
cm. (132 seeds per oz. ) ; short, broad ovate in shape; crown rounded; 
surface rather abundantly but shallowly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Price's 1900. Refs. 401, 533. 

The exact date of introduction of this variety 
is unknown, although its inclusion in Tracy's list com- 
piled in 1901 indicates that it was prior to that time. 
George H. Price of Albany, New York, made the intro- 
duction and, so far as is known, it has not been listed 
by any other seed organization under this name. Mr. 
Price discontinued growing this variety about 1930, 
largely because " demands at this time are almost entirely 
for yellow sweet corn." 

Reports indicate " 1900 produced a medium tall 
stalk, stout and strong, bearing its large ear well down 
on the stalk. The kernels were large, plump, white, 
sweet and tender." 

Pride of America. Refs. 22, 188, 367, 368, 446. 

This was another of the small, very early, red-cobed, 
8-rowed sweet corns so popular 40 years ago. It was 
introduced by Frank Ford and Son of Ravenna, Ohio, 
about 1892. Mr. Ford gave its origin as northern 
Vermont where the shortness of the growing season 
practically prohibited growing those varieties requiring 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



61 



a long season. The variety was carried until 1895 at 
which time it was displaced by a white variety. Extra 
Early Vermont, which apparently possessed every fine 
quality of the former in addition to having white kernels 
and cob. 

Pride of Milford. Refs. 563, 565. Syn. Milford's 
Pride. 

The stock of this variety was obtained by F. H. 
Woodruff and Sons of Milford, Connecticut, from 
a New York State grower. Definite information as to 
its origin is lacking, although it is said to be the result of 
a three-way cross involving Perry's Hybrid, Howling 
Mob, and Champion. It was introduced about 1919 
by the above-mentioned firm under the name of Milford's 
Pride, " a name which somehow evolved into its more 
dignified state, Pride of Milford." 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 87 days, 
1 day earlier than Howling Mob, 1 week later than 
Whipple's Early, and in season with Crosby. The 
plants of this variety are equal in height to those of j 
Howling Mob, have fewer tillers, and more uniform 
coloring on the bracts and anthers of the tassel. The 
husked ears are about the same length and thickness 
but more tapering and abruptly conical to rounded at 
the tip. The kernels in the dry stage are longer in 
proportion to their width than those of Howling Mob, 
more distinctly triangular, and more coarsely wrinkled. 
Pride of Milford is used in a limited way as a home and 
market garden sort in the southern New England states. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 ! 2 feet; stalks moderately slender | 
and straight: nodes 10—12, slightly exposed and prominent, usually 
shaded red. Brace roots present, rather heavy, useful and whorl 
complete on one node. Tillers few, usually much shorter than 
central stalk. Leaves medium long and moderately broad, 30-32 
x 4 ! 4^ 3 4 inches: sheath equal to and often shorter than internode. 
Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to moderately drooping, many 
present, medium long, crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped with 
rather light red: anthers reddish bronze orange vinaceous to terra 
cotta ; 66-68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present. Shank variable in length, rather heavy. 
Husk leaves many, short and light. Husks many, long and rather 
tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately long and plump, 
8-9 x 1 i-2 ! , inches; moderately tapering; base enlarged and 
compressed; tip abruptly conical to slightly rounded, usually 
exposed; rows 12-14, moderately straight, occasionally irregular 
and rather crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size and depth; at dry 
stage dull white, slightly longer than wide, 1.15 x .94 x .36 cm. 
(130 seeds per oz.); triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; 
surface moderately wrinkled; set slightly loose on cob. 

Prolific. Refs. 22, 91, 188. 238, 243, 253, 255, 276, 
278, 284, 397, 422, 432, 535, 537, 538. Syns. 
Dwarf Prolific Sugar, Russell, Russell Early, 
Russell's Prolific, White Prolific. 
The first use of the word Prolific was noted in con- 
nection with Russell's Prolific one of the older varieties 
cataloged by Vick in 1870, Gregory in 1872, Ferry in 
1875, and others. The connotation makes Prolific a 
desirable variety name. However, in that respect it is 
probably similar to Perfection; liable to set up in the 1 



growers mind a standard difficult of attainment, especially 
under adverse seasonal or soil conditions. Among the 
many stocks which have carried Prolific as part of the 
name, we have noted the following: Early Russell's 
Prolific, H. C. Anthony, 1913; Hasting's Prolific, 1911; 
Hunt's White Prolific, Hunt, 1923; Isbell's Prolific, 
Isbell, 1906; Blount's White Prolific, Johnson, 1914; 
and Simpsonia Prolific, Wilson, 1892. 

In time of maturity the varieties mentioned above 
ranged from mid-season to late. Ferry says concerning 
Prolific, " It comes into use about a week after Early 
Minnesota." 

These varieties were for the most part in rather limited 
use, and other than the brief material in the catalogs the 
descriptions available are rather scant. Russell's Prolific 
is treated by Burrill and McClure but not by Sturtevant. 
A listing by Beckert of Pittsburgh occurred as late as 
1913. The description given below is based on the work 
of Burrill and McClure. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7 feet, tillers many; tassels long, 
with drooping lateral spikelets. Ears medium long and moderately 
plump, 6-8 x l 5 s-2 inches, nearly cylindrical; rows 10-12, straight; 
kernels at milk stage dull white; at dry stage dull amber white, 
crown slightly rounded; surface wrinkled; set loosely on white cob. 

Quincy Market. Refs. 54, 207, 208, 238, 241. 514. 533. 

The report of the Committee on Vegetables of 
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society for 1894 
said, " A new variety of sweet corn was shown August 18, 
by P. G. Hanson, under the name of Quincy Market. 
We regard it as a very promising variety, and worthy 
of the special attention of market gardeners." This 
was first cataloged by Gregory in 1893 as a great favorite 
on the Boston market coming just after Cory and before 
Crosby. We presume that it was a selection from 
Crosby and named for Quincy, Massachusetts. Quincy 
Market was cataloged by Breck as late as 1932. 

Ninety days were required for Quincy Market to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 3 days later 
than Crosby, in season with Mimm's Hybrid, and 2 days 
earlier than Metropolitan. The plants are about the 
same height as those of Crosby, slightly heavier, have 
less tendency to tiller, and have shorter and more erect 
tassels. The ears are about the same length but slightly 
less plump. In kernels, arrangement, and tip characters, 
though, the two are very similar. The variety is little 
known outside of New England, and certainly because 
of its uniformity and attractiveness deserves a more 
extensive trial. 

Plant medium tall, 5 J 2-6 feet; stalk medium heavy and 
moderately straight; nodes 9-10, moderately covered, not promi- 
nent, often streaked or solid red at the base. Brace roots present, 
slender, whorl nearly complete and useful. Tillers few, equal to 
central stalk. Leaves medium long and medium broad, 30-32 x 3-4 
inches; sheath equal to and occasionally shorter than internode. 
Tassel medium long and heavy, 16-18 inches, occasionally dark red 
at the base: terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect to 
slightly drooping, medium in number, not crowded, usually branched 
at the base; bracts green, rather heavily striped with dark red; 
anthers usually reddish bronze 1 terra cotta); 66-68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank variable in length, slender and brittle. 
Husks few, rather light, short, loosely wrapped and very easily 



62 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



removed. Silk scanty, short and easily removed. Husked ear 
medium long and medium plump, 7-8 x l J 'i-l 3 4 inches, slightly 
tapering and partly cylindrical: base flat and compressed; tip 
abruptly conical to rounded, distinctly capped; rows 16-20, straight, 
regular, very attractive, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white; small, narrow and medium 
depth; at dry stage white, much longer than wide, thick, .93 x .68 x 
.42 cm. (152 seeds per oz.); roughly triangular in shape; crown 
straight, surface abundantly and finely wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Red Cob Evergreen. Refs. 89, 91, 207, 208, 238, 256, 
290, 322, 403, 411, 527, 535, 537. Syns. Early 
Red Cob Evergreen, Livingston's Evergreen, 
Livingston's Red Cob, New Red Cob Evergreen, 
Ohio Evergreen Red Cob, Pink Cob Evergreen. 
Although the presence of red cobs among sweet 
corns was largely confined to the dwarf-growing, small, 
slender, 8-rowed varieties, an occasional large-eared sort 
came into existence. Such a variety was Livingston's 
Red Cob Evergreen. A. W. Livingston of Columbus, 
Ohio, relates in his 1892 catalog that he had introduced 
the variety over 30 years earlier as originating as a sport 
from Stowell's Evergreen. This would suggest the 
time of origin to be about 1860. About 1897 the intro- 
ducer selected a white-cobbed strain. He continued to 
list both sorts under the name Livingston Evergreen 
until 1922 at which time a regular strain of Stowell's 
Evergreen was offered. 

Plant tall, 7-8} Z feet, stalks heavy, tillers many; tassel 
slender, with lateral spikelets drooping. Ears borne 2 ' £-3 feet 
from the ground, generally cylindrical, tip abruptly conical to 
rounded, 8-9 inches long, l s ' 5 inches in diameter, rows 10-12, 
regular, sometimes spirally arranged. Kernels white; as deep as 
broad, rather thick; wrinkled; set loosely on red cob. 

Red Cob Sweet. Refs. 14, 87, 89, 91, 215, 272, 397, j 
404, 432, 507, 508, 511, 512, 518, 537. Syns. 
Early Red Cob, Red Cob, Red Cob Early Sweet. 
Red Cob Sugar, Red Sweet. 
Hovey and Company, in 1859, and James J. H. 
Gregory, in his retail catalog for 1862 and 1863, listed 
Early Red Cob Sweet as an early and excellent variety of 
Indian corn. This was probably the same corn described 
by Burr in 1863 as Red-cob Sweet. Two types were 
described, one " usually twelve but sometimes fourteen 
rowed " and the other called a sub-variety with 8 rows. 
The kernels were roundish flattened, white when suitable 
for boiling, shrivelled, and of a dull, semi-transparent 
white when ripe. The red cob was called its most dis- 
tinguishing characteristic. 

The Early Red Cob Sweet of Gregory was listed 
for only 2 years, then in 1867 Large Red Cob Sweet 
was cataloged as very superior, coming in after the 
early varieties, with ear of large size, tender and sweet. 
This might have been the large 12- to 14-rowed type of 
Burr. In 1870 a Red Sweet corn appears which was 
considered similar to Sweet Mexican in quality but with 
no description given as to size, color of kernel or cob. 
Sturtevant in 1884 described a variety with red cob and 
whitish kernel having 12 rows. All of these variations 
in name referred to either an 8- or 12 -rowed corn with 
red cob and whitish kernel. These could easily have 
furnished the stock that later became Marblehead and 
Cory. 



Red Evergreen. Refs. 412, 415, 511, 512. Syn. Pink 
Evergreen. 

John Lewis Childs of Floral Park, New York, 
introduced this variety about 1892 as a sport from 
the " common Evergreen." Because of its unique 
red kernels in the edible stage, it apparently was used 
by some growers interested in such novelties. It 
was rather short lived, however, having been dis- 
continued in 1897 by the introducer. Reports indicate 
that it was a valuable late variety with dark red kernels, 
differing from Evergreen in only this respect. 

In 1926 the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment 
Station sent out for trial a variety called at the time 
Red Leaved White Evergreen (Ref. 118 . It had its 
origin with the Department of Genetics under the 
direction of Dr. D. F. Jones and was developed as " a 
first generation hybrid of inbred strains of Evergreen 
and another variety of miscellaneous origin." It 
represented one of the first attempts to breed sweet 
corn varieties by the use of inbred strains to attain greater 
vigor and uniformity. The variety name was first 
shortened to Red Evergreen and eventually to Redgreen 
under which name it is dispensed today by the Associated 
Seed Growers of New Haven, Connecticut. 

The use of the name Red Evergreen is rather com- 
mon in certain canning crop producing areas to refer 
to the hybrid inbred strain. It should not be confused 
with the variety discussed above, as there is no relation- 
ship of a varietal nature. 

Redgreen produced plants 6 1 2 to 7 feet tall, rather 
slender and straight, with a considerable tendency to 
tiller. The foliage was prominently marked with red 
along the midrib and margins as well as on the sheaths 
and exposed portions of the internodes. The tassels 
were very heavily shaded with red and possessed uni- 
formly colored (warm buff) anthers. The husked ears 
were 7 to 8 inches long. Is to 1 3 4 inches in diameter, 
and possessed 12 to 14 rows of rather small, moderately 
narrow white kernels which reached edible maturity at 
Geneva in 90 days. In all characters a remarkable 
uniformity was in evidence and a definite demand created 
among growers and canners. 

Red River. Refs. 430, 507, 508. 

This variety, which originated in Minnesota where it 
was first known in 1878, was described by Sturtevant in 
1884 as a sub-variety of Narragansett. The ears were 
about 4 inches long, cylindrical, bluntly rounded at apex; 
8-rowed in general: kernel large, flatly rounded, crinkled, 
closely set, of a reddish flesh color. 

Roslyn Hybrid. Refs. 22, 61. 74. 90. 91, 92, 95. 96, 
214, 238, 328, 368, 405, 491. 503, 508. 514. 533, 
535, 537. Syns. Roslyn, Roslyn Hybrid Sugar, 
Roslyn Hybrid Sweet. 
Henry Stabler of Roslyn Farm in Montgomery 
County. Maryland, commenced growing and working 
with sweet corn about 1844. As a result of his great 
interest and knowledge of sweet corn he and his son. 
Dr. Augustus Stabler, were responsible for the intro- 
duction of 3 important varieties of sweet corn. Roslyn 




OREGON EVERGREEN 



(Three-quarters natural sizej 




SILVER BANTAM 



(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



63 



Hybrid was one of these varieties, the history of which 
is taken from Bulletin No. 96 of the Maryland Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station: " In the year 1878 the 
crop of sweet corn at Roslyn Farm consisted of about 
30 acres, nearly half of which was planted from improved 
seed of Stowell's Evergreen, and the remainder was of the 
variety known originally as Burr's Mammoth. A care- 
ful comparative study of these 2 varieties showed that 
each possessed certain points of superiority which the 
other did not. In the autumn while selecting seed the 
thought occurred that it might be possible to produce a 
hybrid from these two varieties. Five ears of Stowell's 
and seven of Mammoth satisfied all requirements and 
were saved. In the spring of 1879 this seed was planted, 
the first row to Stowell's and the second to Mammoth 
and so on until the seed was used up. When the tassels 
began to appear they were removed from the rows of 
Stowell's leaving the Mammoth intact. Seed was 
saved from the Mammoth rows and in the spring of 
1880. 3 varieties. Mammoth, Stowell's and the Hybrid 
were planted. At the close of the season it was per- 
fectly evident that the Hybrid was far superior to the 
others and in succeeding years selection of this stock 
was made each year and called Roslyn Hybrid." 

The new variety was rather slow in getting into 
trade channels, but was listed by Henderson in 1892, 
Thorburn in 1893, and Dreer in 1894. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet, stalks heavy; foliage abundant. Tillers 
few. Tassel long, heavy, stiff, multi-branched. Ears borne 24-30 
inches from the ground. Husked ear long and plump, 8-10 x 1 7 „- 
2' 4 inches, moderately tapering: base compressed; tip rounded and 
nearly capped: rows 12-16, straight, regular. Kernels at milk 
stage white, moderately narrow and deep; at dry stage dull amber 
white. 1*4 times as long as broad; surface wrinkled; set rather 
loosely on cob. 

Ruby. Refs. 2, 53, 65, 75, 90, 91, 94, 238, 350, 367, 
405, 408, 411, 503, 511, 514, 533, 536. Syns. 
Improved Ruby, Ruby Sugar, Ruby Sweet. 

Ruby as originally introduced was entirely distinct 
from other varieties by reason of the stalks and husks, 
which were of a very handsome dark red color giving it 
an odd and beautiful appearance in growth. C. N. 
Brackett of Newton, Massachusetts, originated this new 
corn and sold seed from his reselected stock to W. Atlee 
Burpee who offered it in 1892. A previous introduction 
of the variety in 1888 had been premature because less 
than half of the plants came true from seed. Burpee 
called his introduction Improved Ruby and featured it 
until 1903. The only other sort having similar color char- 
acteristics, which had appeared previously, was Farmer's 
Club, a much smaller growing variety. 

The records of the Massachusetts Horticultural 
Society for 1888 show that a First Class Certificate of 
Merit was awarded C. N. Brackett, Chairman of the 
Committee on Vegetables of the Massachusetts Horti- 
cultural Society from 1866 to 1898, for Ruby Sweet 
Com, a new and novel variety, originating with him, 
with ruby-colored husks and stalks and pure white 
kernels of excellent quality. Ruby was more of a 
novelty than a practical variety and its use was largely 
by the home gardener and amateur horticulturist. 



Plant tall, 6-8 feet, stalks heavy; foliage abundant and large, 
dark red in color. Tillers many, nearly as tall as central stalk. 
Tassel long, laterals many, drooping and crowded. Ears borne 
2 I 10 inches from the ground; husks dark red in color; husked ears 
moderately long and plump, 8-9 x 1 " „ 2 > 4 inches, moderately 
tapering; tip rounded to abruptly tapering; rows 12-16, moderately 
straight at medial and apex but usually somewhat irregular at the 
base. Kernels in milk stage creamy white, at dry stage dull white, 
large, longer than broad, decidedly thick; crown slightly rounded; 
surface wrinkled; set rather loosely on purplish white cob. 

Saunders. Refs. 386, 568. Syns. " Second Early, " 
Saunders' Second Early. 
S. D. Woodruff introduced a variety of sweet 
corn in 1907 which he called Saunders, after the name 
of the man near Albany, New York, from whom the 
stock seed was obtained. Although the introducer 
speaks of it as a hybrid, the exact parentage is not 
mentioned. Concerning the variety the introducers 
write, " An extra early, part red and part white cob 
with an ear 40 per cent larger than Red Cory, full as 
early and wonderfully sweeter and more prolific." 
It was also listed the same year by J. F. Noll and Co. 
of Newark, New Jersey. Both companies, however, 
discontinued it 2 years later. 

September Morn. Ref. 134. 

This large, many-rowed variety originated with 
V. H. Neilsen of Council Bluffs, Iowa, as the result 
of a cross involving Country Gentleman and Stowell's 
Evergreen. After 5 years of selection to obtain a 
stock with straight rows that still retained the depth 
of kernel characteristic of Country Gentleman, the 
variety was transferred to the Di Giorgi Brothers of 
the same city who introduced it about 1917 and have 
since continued to list it. 

At Geneva it produced edible ears in about 100 days, 
a few days later than Stowell's Evergreen and Country 
Gentleman. In many ways it resembled a stock of 
Narrow-grained Evergreen, since a large number of 
narrow rows was its outstanding characteristic. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet, stalks heavy and straight; tillers few. 
Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and two per stalk; husks 
many, very heavy and tightly wrapped. Husked ears moderately 
long and plump, 8-9 x 2-2'^ inches, slightly tapering; rows 18-24, 
usually regular. Kernels at milk stage white, very narrow, thin 
and deep. 

Shakers. Refs. 22, 61, 73, 89, 91, 126, 207, 208, 214, 
238, 241, 278, 328, 329, 350, 368, 401, 403, 411, 
503, 508, 512, 533, 536. Syns. " Aspinwall, " 
Shaker's Early, Shaker's Early Sweet, Shaker's 
Large Early. 
This sweet corn, a superb early variety in its day, 
originated among the Shakers in New York State and 
was introduced about 1888 by J. M. Thorburn & Co. 
of New York City. As first offered this was a fine- 
appearing sort with large 12-rowed ears well filled, in 
season in the interval between Crosby and Stowell's 
Evergreen. 

In 1910, Aspinwall, similar to and a selection from 
Shakers, was put on the market by William F. Aspinwall 
of Loudon ville. New York, and also by the South Family 
of Shakers. This was listed in 1913 by the George H. 



64 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Price Seed Co. of Albany, New York. For 20 years it 
was rather popular in this section but was finally dis- 
continued in 1933. 

In trials at Geneva the earliness feature of Shaker's 
Early has not been pronounced since it requires 95 days 
to reach edible maturity. This was 3 days later than 
Metropolitan and 3 days earlier than Stowell's Ever- 
green. The plants are about 1 foot shorter than those 
of Metropolitan, have much less tendency to tiller, and 
ere colored with red more extensively on the tassel. 
The husks are slightly larger and more loosely wrapped, 
while the husked ears are about an inch shorter and 
about the same plumpness. This old variety is not 
grown to any extent today, having been replaced by other 
varieties. As is the case in many of the older sorts, 
the original stocks have disappeared. 

Plant medium tall, 5'_>~6 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
straight; nodes 10—12, covered, not prominent, slightly streaked 
with red at the base. Brace roots present, moderately useful and 
complete on one node. Tillers few, somewhat shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves moderately long and medium broad, 32-34 x 3}^— 4 
inches; sheath longer than internode. Tassel moderately long and 
heavy, 18-20 inches, coarse; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
moderately erect, medium length, many present, crowded and 
branched at the base; bracts dark green, sparsely striped with pale 
red; anthers reddish bronze iterra cotta to vinaceous russet); 
70-72 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, very often two ears per stalk. 
Shank short and moderately slender, 2-3 inches. Husk leaves 
few and short. Husks moderately many, long, not tightly wrapped 
and rather easily removed. Husked ear medium long and moder- 
ately plump, 7-8 x 1 ' g-2 inches, slightly tapering, nearly cylindrical; 
base compressed; tip abruptly conical to rounded, slightly exposed; 
rows 12-14, moderately straight, occasionally irregular at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately large, broader than 
deep; at dry stage dull white, short, moderately broad, rather thin, 
.9 x 1.05 x .38 cm. (128 seeds per oz.< ; nearly square; crown rounded; 
surface abundantly but shallowly and finely wrinkled; set slightly 
loose on cob. 

Sheffield. Refs. 28, 46, 78, 238, 241, 292, 403, 458, 
459, 460, 517, 533. Syns. Earliest Sheffield, Early 
Sheffield, New Earliest Sheffield. 
Sheffield was the name given to a variety of sweet 
corn arising as the result of a definitely planned cross 
made between Cory and Extra Early Adams. Dr. 
Van Fleet, who made the cross, was a well-known 
hybridizer and was after a new corn combining earli- 
ness with quality. W. Atlee Burpee secured seed 
of the hybrid and sent it to C. S. Clark, seed corn 
grower in Ohio, who wrote enthusiastically of its good 
qualities. " This ' Van Fleet ' corn as you call it is 
8- to 10-rowed; very distinct in shape, color and growth. 
Its great merit lies in the fact that it does not smut 
and this fact alone is worthy of introduction." Burpee 
offered it in 1899 as Sheffield and continued it in his 
catalog until 1915. 

Plant tall, 7-7' ■> feet; stalks moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 12-13, nearly covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, 
moderately heavy, whorl complete on one node, useful. Tillers 
moderately many, equal to and occasionally slightly shorter than 
the central stalk. Leaves long and moderately broad, 34-36 x 4—5 
inches; sheath equal to and shorter than internode. Tassel moder- 
ately long and medium heavy, 18-20 inches, slightly streaked with 
red at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal 



to slightly drooping, medium length, moderately many and crowded; 
bracts and anthers variable; 70-72 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th to 7th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present. Shank short, 2-4 inches, and decidedly 
heavy. Husk leaves few, short and light. Husks many, rather 
heavy, medium length, rather tightly wrapped and difficult to 
remove. Husked ear moderately long and moderately plump, 
8-9 x l 7 v-2 inches, slightly tapering; base enlarged and com- 
pressed; tip conical and exposed; rows 12-14, moderately straight, 
slightly irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, rather small, narrow and medium 
depth; at dry stage opalescent white, longer than wide, medium 
thickness, 1.16 x .90 x .35 cm. 1 108 seeds per oz.); triangular; crown 
slightly rounded; surface moderately and rather deeply wrinkled; 
set somewhat loosely on the cob. 

Shoe Peg. Refs. 91, 126, 290, 328, 329, 335, 350, 368, 
445. 510. 514. 533. 
The original stock for this type of sweet corn is 
said to have been grown by a family in Bordentown, 
New Jersey, and held originally by them for many 
years prior to 1882. As a sequence to the several 
introductions made during the next few years, Johnson 
and Stokes of Philadelphia selected either from the 
original stock or from the Ne Plus Ultra, a slightly 
larger eared type which they called Shoe Peg. This 
they introduced and copyrighted in 1889. The new 
introduction was popular for a few years, but when 
the still larger eared Country Gentleman was offered 
in 1890 it supplanted all similar sorts. The names 
Shoe Peg and Ne Plus Ultra persist today but most 
strains selling under these names are now Country 
Gentleman. A stock secured from J. Bolgiano and 
tested at Geneva appeared to be earlier and with smaller 
cob and kernels. This was possibly a survival of the 
old type introduced by Johnson and Stokes. 

Silver Bantam. Ref. 264. Illus. 63. 

As the name would indicate, plants of Silver 
Bantam produce 8-rowed ears that greatly resemble 
ears of Golden Bantam in both quality and appear- 
ance. The variety is often called the " silver-hued 
twin " of Golden Bantam but such is true in name 
and appearance only, for Silver Bantam was not intro- 
duced until 1927. Peter Henderson 8s Co., the intro- 
ducers, secured seed from John Ware of Plainfield, 
New Jersey. 

The origin was accidental. Golden Bantam, Metro- 
politan, and Black Mexican were growing in the same 
garden plot and one ear of Golden Bantam that remained 
after the harvest contained 1 2 white grains. These were 
saved and planted the next year. Some black mixing 
also occurred but these dark seeds were not saved. 
The parents of this very attractive new variety apparently 
were the Metropolitan crossed on the Golden Bantam. 
After selection for 5 years it was inspected by the head 
gardener and manager from Henderson's and purchased 
on the spot. This was in 1923 and after still further 
selection it was introduced in 1927. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 87 days, 

9 days earlier than Best of All or White Bantam, in 

season with Crosby, and 5 days later than Market 

Gardener's Extra Early. Silver Bantam produces plants 

i 1 to 1 J •_> feet shorter than those of Best of All, more 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



65 



slender, and more consistently colored on the bracts. 
The husked ears are 2 to 3 inches shorter and about the 
same thickness, otherwise they are much alike. The 
resemblance to Golden Bantam in appearance, with the 
exception of color, is rather striking. Those who like the 
small-eared sorts in a mid-season variety will find in this 
variety something that will remind them of the regular 
Bantam so popular among the yellow varieties. It is 
not grown to any extent at the present time. 

Plant moderately short, 4 3 4-5 feet; stalks slender and 
moderately straight; nodes 7-8, exposed, prominent, shaded with 
red at the base. Brace roots present, slender, moderately useful 
and complete. Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk, 
often bear one good ear. Leaves moderately short and medium 
broad, 26-28 x 3 3 .j-4 inches, distinctly red at the margin; sheath 
shorter than internode. Tassel medium long and slender, 15-18 
inches, somewhat feathery, streaked with red at the base; terminal 
spike moderately erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly 
drooping, many, medium long and moderately crowded; bracts 
dark green, moderately striped with red; anthers buff (deep colonial 
buff to chamois i ; 60-63 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one usually a nubbin. Shank medium long and 
slender. Husks medium in number, short, rather tightly wrapped, 
inner layer adheres to kernels, somewhat difficult to remove. Silk 
medium in amount and length, uniformly pale green in color, 
difficult to remove. Husked ear moderately short and slender, 
6-7 x 1J^-1M inches; moderately tapering; base slightly enlarged 
and occasionally open; tip long conical, usually exposed, but occa- 
sionally capped; rows 8, straight, occasionally paired, regular, 
attractive; furrows, when present, deep and very narrow. 

Kernels at milk stage white, small, medium width and shallow; 
at dry stage opalescent white, slightly wider than long, medium 
thickness, .90 x 1.06 x .40 cm. 132 seeds per oz.), short oval in 
shape; crown semicircular; surface abundantly and finely crinkled 
and pitted, often very shallow; set tightly on cob. 

Silver Coin. Refs. 97, 238, 322, 404, 513, 515. Syn. 
New Silver Coin. 
This moderately late, vigorous grower was intro- 
duced by A. W. Livingston's Sons, Columbus, Ohio, 
in 1893. No information is available concerning its 
origin, but its similarity in many respects to Stowell's 
Evergreen leads one to suspect it to have been a selec- 
tion from that variety. The plants were slender and 
about 7 feet tall, having ears 7} £ to 9 inches long con- 
taining 14 to 16 rows. The kernels were milky white, 
deeper than broad, deeply creased and wrinkled, and 
were reported to be of good quality and of delicate 
flavor. It was discontinued about 1906. 

Snow Cream Table. Ref. 500. Syn. Snow Cream. 
Lost or inadequate records on the part of many 
of the earlier seedsmen have made it impossible to 
ascertain in a great many instances the origin and 
history of many varieties, including this one. It was 
featured by Walter P. Stokes of Moorestown, New Jersey, 
at least as early as 1912 and continued to 1918. The 
descriptions and illustrations suggest a strong resemblance 
to Howling Mob, although no direct comparison is 
available. Reports indicate that the plants grew to a 
height of 6 or 7 feet and often produced two full-sized 
ears. The husked ears were 7 to 8 inches long, moder- 
ately plump and tapering, and possessed 12 to 14 rows 
of snow-white kernels. 



Stabler'*. Refs. 22, 61, 65, 89, 91, 93, 121, 125, 207, 

208, 214, 238, 328, 329, 338, 350, 368, 397, 403, 

405, 411, 487, 508, 510, 516, 533, 535, 537. Syns. 

Pedigree, Stabler's Early, Stabler's Early Sugar, 

Stabler's Extra Early, Stabler's Pedigree. 

This variety, first introduced by W. Atlee Burpee 

in 1890, originated with Henry Stabler of Maryland 

who was also responsible for Roslyn Hybrid. Also listed 

by Thorburn, Johnson and Stokes, Dreer, Henderson, and 

others, it became rather a standard sort popular foi 

several years because of its earliness and sweetness. By 

some it was considered to be similar to Shaker's Early and 

also to Early Cosmopolitan introduced later by Burpee. 

Its last listing was in 1919 by Thcrburn. 

Stark's Three-Ear. Refs. 345, 492. Syns. New 3-Ear, 
Three-Ear. 

Introduced about 1928 by Stark Brothers of Louisi- 
ana, Missouri, this variety was rather short lived. 
Were it not for circumstances which resulted in the 
purchase of the seed stocks by W. Atlee Burpee, the 
variety would undoubtedly be in existence today. 
Three-Ear originated as a first-generation hybrid involv- 
ing Moneymaker, the pistillate parent, and Stowell's 
Evergreen. It was reputed to have had great uni- 
formity, exceptional vigor, and productiveness, often 
bearing three full-sized ears per plant. As grown at 
Geneva, more often one and two ears were produced, 
although occasionally a third ear did occur. Edible 
maturity was reached in 96 days. 

Plant tall, 8-8 1 2 feet, stalks heavy and straight, tillers medium 
in number. Tassel moderately long, 18-20 inches with lateral 
spikelets long and horizontal. Ears borne at 5th, 6th, and 7th 
nodes, often two and occasionally 3 ears per stalk. Husked ear 
moderately long and moderately plump, 8-9 x 1?4— ljj inches, 
slightly to moderately tapering; rows 12-14, straight and attractive. 
Kernels white, medium size and moderately deep; at dry stage 
pale amber, triangular in shape, moderately wrinkled; set slightly 
loose on cob. 

Stowell's Evergreen. Refs. 13, 14, 22, 24, 58, 61, 73, 

74, 77, 87, 89, 91, 93, 94, 95, 96, 120, 121, 124, 
126, 129, 175, 179, 189, 200, 207, 208, 235, 236, 
238, 240, 241, 243, 255, 266, 270, 271, 274, 278, 
295, 308, 316, 328, 329, 335, 343, 344, 350, 356, 
367, 368, 397, 403, 404, 405, 408, 410, 411, 412, 
414, 418, 422, 423, 435, 447, 448, 474, 478, 487, 
491, 499, 503, 507, 508, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 
515, 516, 517, 525, 532, 533, 535, 536, 537, 538, 
544, 545, 546, 552, 562. Syns. Acme Evergreen, 
"Avon Evergreen," " De Wolf's Early Acme," 
Evergreen, Fancy Evergreen, Gold Coin Ever- 
green, Improved Evergreen, Improved Stowell's 
Evergreen, Kelly's Hybrid, Large Mammoth 
Evergreen, Late Mammoth Evergreen, Lead-All 
Evergreen, Mammoth Evergreen, New England 
Evergreen, Pedigree Stowell's Evergreen, Pros- 
perity Evergreen, Stowell's, Stowell's Evergreen 
Sweet, Stowell's State Fair, Stowell's Sugar, Sugar 
Evergreen, Two-Eared Evergreen, White Cob 
Evergreen. Illus. 25. 
Stowell's Evergreen is one of the oldest and most 
popular varieties of sweet corn in existence. The first 



66 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



listing of the variety is not known, but the name Stowell's 
Evergreen was used, among others, in the catalogs of J. 
M. Thorburn & Co., 1856: Robert Buist. 1859; Hovey & 
Co.. 1859; and R. H. Allen & Co., 1860. In some of the 
early catalogs the name Evergreen Sweet was used and 
lacking other evidence must be considered the same as 
Stowell's. 

The first names added to the list published in 1848 
by J. H. Salisbury were Darling's Early, Old Colony, 
and Stowell's Evergreen. The two latter varieties have 
had a very similar history. 

Prof. Mapes of Newark, New Jersey, in the Work- 
ing Farmer of 1850, gives the history as follows: " This 
corn is a hybrid between Menomony soft corn and the 
northern Sugar corn and was first grown by Mr. Nathan 
Stowell of Burlington, N. J. We purchased from Mr. S. 
a number of ears dried for seed and he presented us 
with a few ears surrounded by the husks, grown the 
previous summer, the inner leaves of the husks of which, 
and the corn and cob, were in as green a state as when 
pulled the previous August. Near the close of the 
late fair of the American institute, I presented the 
managers with two ears pulled in August 1849, and 
twelve ears pulled in August 1850. They were boiled 
and served up together and appeared to be alike, and 
equal to corn fresh from the garden." 

At Geneva this old favorite came into production in 
98 days. 1 day later than Country Gentleman, in season 
with Narrow Grained Evergreen, and 2 days earlier 
than Late Mammoth. The plants are much like those 
of Narrow Grained Evergreen, possibly slightly more 
slender, with more tendency to tiller and have somewhat 
darker green tassels. The husked ears are about the 
same size, more tapering, and contain 6 to 8 less rows 
of kernels. The kernels are decidedly broader and 
usually somewhat mere irregular in appearance. In the 
dry stage the crown is distinctly converging, a character 
not present in most varieties. Stowell's Evergreen has 
long been one of the " old guard " in sweet corn collec- 
tions. It is probably the most widely known and appre- 
ciated variety ever to be introduced and as such has 
been traditional among amateur and professional gard- 
eners alike. All other late crop sweet corns have been 
and continue to be compared to it in respect to its many 
desirable qualities. It has been equally successful when 
used in the home garden, the market garden, and for 
the canning industry. 

Plant tall, 7j£-8 feet: stalks moderately heavy; nodes 12-14, 
usually exposed, prominent; brace roots present, moderately slender, 
complete on one node, useful. Tillers moderately many, some- 
what shorter than central stalk. Leaves long and medium broad, 
33-35 x 3' 4 -3 3 i inches; sheath shorter than and occasionally equal 
to internode. Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to moderately erect, 
medium in number, long and somewhat crowded; bracts green, 
sparsely striped with red; anthers mostly dull yellow chamois to 
old gold ; 73-74 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank moderately long and heavy, 5-7 inches. 
Husks medium in number, moderately short, rather tightly wrapped. 
Silk pale red to amber, abundant, moderately long and easily 
removed. Husked car moderately long and plump, 8-9 s." 



inches, slightly tapering; base enlarged and compressed; tip abruptly 
conical and slightly exposed; rows 16-13, straight, regular, crowded 
around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage silvery white, large, medium width and 
very deep; at dry stage opalescent white, large, moderately wide, 
long and thin, 1.44 x .93 x .32 cm. (112 seeds per oz.\ somewhat 
rectangular in shape; crown converging; surface exceedingly deep 
and coarsely wrinkled, irregularly crease dented; set very loose on 
cob. 

Suiinyslope Special. Refs. 335, 495. Syn. Sunny- 
slope. 
This variety was developed by Arthur L. Richie 
cf Riverton. New Jersey, from a cross between Howling 
Mob and Floracroft Beauty. These varieties were 
planted in adjacent plots in a trial in 1911 and allowed to 
interpollinate. By 1916 a new strain coming from the 
cross w^as sufficiently fixed for inspection and a trial 
was arranged in which other early varieties grown for 
the Philadelphia market were planted. Several seeds- 
men saw this trial and were favorably impressed by the 
comparative eariiness and size of the cross. The World 
War delayed its introduction except in a local way until 
1924, when the Stokes Co. listed it as a second early 
variety, but discontinued it in 1927. 

Surprise. Refs. 183, 304, 345, 348, 478. Syns. Early 
Honeysuckle, Early Surprise, Extra Early Sur- 
prise, Pioneer. 

According to the Descriptive Catalogue of 
Vegetables issued by the Associated Seed Growers, 
New Haven. Connecticut, this variety was developed by 
them from Early Mayflower and introduced in 1927. It 
is quite possible that the stocks were offered a few years 
previously, for Early Surprise was listed by Fottler, 
Fiske and Rawson in 1925; by Breck and Fiske in 1926; 
and as Pioneer by Forbes in 1926. Early Honeysuckle, 
which was offered by Kendall and Whitney in 1922, also 
appeared to be much like present-day stocks of Surprise 
as sold by this company. Early Surprise is another 
variety which traces its parentage back to Mammoth 
White Cory which, in its type, stands back of all present- 
day, early, large-eared, white varieties. 

At Geneva 77 days were required for this variety 
to reach edible maturity. This proved to be 2 days 
earlier than Pocohontas, 2 days later than Early May- 
flower, and 3 days earlier than Mammoth White Cory. 
The plants are much the same as Pocohontas but less 
inclined to tiller. The ears have much shorter and 
lighter husk leaves and somewhat shorter husks, while 
the husked ears are slightly shorter. The resemblance 
of the two varieties is striking and except for minor 
differences can be considered as closely related. Surprise 
is used to a considerable extent in northeastern United 
States where it is grown successfully as a home and 
market garden sort. 

Plant moderately short, 4'j'-5 feet; stalks slender, zigzag; 
nodes 7-9, exposed, prominent. Tillers few, much shorter than 
central stall:. Leaves moderately short and medium broad, 25-27 x 

• inches: sheath shorter than internodes. Tassel moderately 
long and slender, 18-20 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
nearly erect, many, short and crowded; bracts green, sparsely 
striped with light red: anthers reddish bronze (.terra cotta to 
vinaceous red); 56-58 days to anthesis. 




VANGUARD 



(Four -fifths natural size) 




WHIPPLE'S EARLY WHITE 



(Four-fifths natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



67 



Ears borne 2nd and 3rd nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Husks thick, short, rather 
tightly wrapped, easily removed. Husked ear moderately short and 
moderately plump, 6-7 x 1 ;! 4~2 inches; moderately tapering; base 
slightly enlarged and compressed; tip abruptly conical and slightly 
exposed; rows 10-12, moderately straight, occasionally somewhat 
irregular near the apex, crowded around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately large, wide and thick; 
at dry stage dull creamy white, medium size, short, medium wide 
and thick, .87 x 1.0 x .40 cm. (120 seeds per oz.); short oval to 
somewhat triangular in shape; crown moderately rounded; surface 
very sparsely and coarsely wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Sweetheart. Ref. 266. 

This sort was introduced in 1918 by the Holmes 
Seed Co. of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Although the 
name had been used in 1912 by the Germaine Seed 
and Plant Company of Los Angeles, it was used with 
reference to another variety, the name of which they 
saw fit to change to Sweetheart. Holmes' Sweetheart 
is " the outcome of a selection from both Evergreen 
and Country Gentleman, and then crossed again with 
a variety named French Honey, retaining the sweet- 
ness of the latter and the depth and breadth of kernel of 
the former varieties." 

The plants were reputed to grow 7 to 9 feet and 
produce two, three, and occasionally four ears per plant. 
The ears were 8 to 9 inches long and possessed 12 rows 
of broad deep kernels. The variety was short lived, 
having been discontinued prior to 1923. 

Sweet Squaw. Ref. 335. 

Sweet Squaw resulted from a cross made by Arthur 
J. Logsdail at the Central Experimental Farm at Ottawa, 
Canada, in 1913 between White Squaw, a flint corn as 
grown by the Mandan Indians of Dakota and Manitoba, 
and Early Malakhoff. After selections from this cross had 
been made and given a rather thorough trial, the best was 
named Sweet Squaw in 1917. The variety has become 
popular in some of the prairie provinces of Canada. The 
average length of ears is 6 inches with 12 rows to the ear. 
Tom Thumb. Refs. 14, 22, 61, 89, 90, 91, 122, 214, 
407, 507, 508, 535, 537, 538. Syns. Early Tom 
Thumb, Extra Early Tom Thumb. 

Tom Thumb first became known about 1865 when 
it was used locally in New Jersey as the earliest sort that 
could be grown for the New York market. As then 
known, it represented an improvement in size of ear over 
Darling's Early, long the standard early sweet corn. Price 
of Albany in 1874 was one of the first to list Tom Thumb, 
and although this listing was followed by others, it never 
became a variety of first importance. 

Plant moderately short, 3'_.-5 feet; stalks slender. Foliage 
scanty. Tassel slender, laterals few, slender and drooping. Ears 
borne low, 10-12 inches from the ground. Dry ear short and 
slender, 4 J j-6 x l^-l'o inches; nearly cylindrical; tip abruptly 
tapering to rounded; rows 8, regular, pairs only distinct at the base; 
cob white. Kernel at dry state whitish amber, wider than long 
116 seeds per oz. I ; crown rounded ; surface rather heavily wrinkled. 

Triumph. Refs. 15, 22, 61, 73, 74, 89, 91, 93, 121, 126, i 
168, 214, 238, 241, 403, 405, 411, 423, 428, 435, 
503, 507, 508, 509, 515, 517, 533, 535, 536, 537, 
538, 545. Syns. Improved Triumph, New 

Triumph, Triumph Sugar, Triumph Sweet. 



This sweet corn was first brought out by D. C. 
Voorhees of Blawenburg, New Jersey. A single trial 
ground test made by the Rural New-Yorker in 1874 
was so favorable that the agnomen " tip-top " sug- 
gested itself to the editor for his report. No definite 
record is available of the origin of Triumph, and since 
at the time of its introduction no other sweet corn 
even closely resembled it, it was said to have come 
into existence as the result of chance crossing. The 
variety became the precursor of the many slender long- 
eared varieties which, although never of first importance, 
have been known fcr their sweetness and for the attrac- 
tive appearance of the ear. 

Plant tall, 6-7 feet; stalks heavy and vigorous. Tillers few. 
Tassels heavy. Ears borne 24-30 inches from the ground, one and 
often two ears per stalk. Husk leaves many, medium long. Dry 
ears moderately long and moderately slender, 8-9 x V/z~\% inches, 
distinctly tapering; base enlarged and often open; tip usually 
rounded; rows 8-10, often distinctly paired at the base, straight, 
regular. Kernels at dry stage whitish amber, short, thick, broader 
than long (107 seeds per oz.); crown nearly flattened; surface 
moderately wrinkled. 

Vanguard. Refs. 335, 344, 348, 496. Syn. Earliest 
Ever. Illus. 66. 

Always on the alert to find or develop an earlier sweet 
corn, Arthur L. Richie, in 1917, planted alternate rows of 
his new Sunny slope Special with Dreer's Aristocrat, 
detasseling one row to insure crossing. By saving seed 
from this row and planting it the next year, he obtained a 
mixture of white, pinkish, and red seeds. The white 
seeds only were saved for future planting, and in a few 
years a pure strain became fixed which proved to be 
superior to the parent variety Sunnyslope Special. This 
was followed by careful ear-to-row selection, and as a 
reward for his perseverance he eventually developed 
another winner. Richie sold seed of this locally under 
the name Earliest Ever which name Francis C. Stokes 
& Co., Inc., changed to Vanguard at the time of its 
introduction in 1926. 

At Geneva, 81 days were necessary to produce edible 
ears of this variety, which was a week earlier than Howl- 
ing Mob, about the same season as Whipple's Early, 
and 5 days later than Alpha. Vanguard produces 
plants the same height as those of Howling Mob, has 
much less tendency to tiller, and is usually without the 
red streaking present on the latter. The ears are borne 
much farther away from the stalk and at a more obtuse 
angle than those of Howling Mob and have husk leaves 
that are distinctly shorter and lighter. The husked ears 
are of equal length, about the same thickness and have 
two to four less rows and correspondingly wider kernels 
than those of Howling Mob. The variety has achieved 
greatest importance as a home and market garden sort. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-7 feet; stalk moderately heavy, 
slightly zigzag; nodes 10-11, somewhat exposed, moderately promi- 
nent. Brace roots present, moderately heavy, whorl complete 
on one node, useful. Tillers few present, much shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves medium long and medium broad, 30—32 x 4?^-4 , 2 
inches; sheath slightly shorter than internode. Tassel medium 
long, 16-18 inches, rather coarse and occasionally colored at the 
base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets slightly drooping, 
moderately many, crowded and moderately long; bracts green, 



68 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



slightly striped with red; anthers light reddish bronze (terra cotta 
to vinaceous russet); 60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, well away from main stalk 
at a rather wide angle, one and occasionally two ears per stalk. 
Husks many, thick, short, tightly wrapped, not easily removed. 
Husk leaves extremely small and light, usually perpendicular to 
the ear. Husked ear moderately long and plump, 8-9 x 2-2 ' g inches; 
moderately tapering; base enlarged; tip conical and exposed; 
rows 10-12, occasionally paired, moderately straight, slightly 
irregular at base. 

Kernels at milk stage white, moderately small, shallow and 
medium width; at dry stage opalescent white, medium size, short, 
moderately wide and thick; 1.0 x 1.01 x .4 cm. (100 seeds per oz.), 
oval in shape; crown rounded; surface rather abundantly but 
shallowly wrinkled; set on cob tightly. 

Voorhecs Red. Refs. 237, 403, 461. 

One of the many plant breeding projects carried out 
by Byron D. Halstead, botanist and horticulturist at the 
New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station at the 
beginning of the present century, was one to improve the 
varieties of sweet corn existing at that time. A cross 
between Black Mexican and Egyptian was made in 1899, 
and in 1903 a new type was selected which seemed to have 
considerable promise. The variety was named Voorhees 
Red for Edward B. Voorhees, then Director of the New 
Jersey Station. This new type of sweet corn was the 
result of a cross between a black and a white variety 
and produced ears of a beautiful pink when picked for 
cooking, and with red kernels when mature. Prof. 
Halstead got the usual parti-colored result in the seed 
grains, ranging from light pink and rose to dark red and 
black purple. As served on the table there was scarcely 
a hint of its Mexican parentage except its sweet and 
tender qualities. The distribution of the seed was made 
to any who wished samples and for a time it was quite 
popular as a midseason variety. The Ford Seed Com- 
pany of Ravenna, Ohio, offered it in 1906 in trial packets 
of ten kernels each. 

Plant medium tall, 5-6 feet; stalks heavy; usually two ears 
per stalk, occasionally an additional nubbin present. Husked ear 
medium long, 7-8 inches; nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering; 
rows 10-12, straight and regular. Kernels at milk stage white to 
pale pink, shallow, fairly broad and thick; at dry stage red; short 
oval in shape; surface moderately, uniformly wrinkled. 

Western Queen. Refs. 109, 178, 406. 

This variety originated with H. C. Cummings of 
Oklahoma who offered it as the result of a cross involving 
Country Gentleman and King Phillip, a well-known field 
corn. So far as can be determined, John Lewis Childs 
of Floral Park, New York, was the first large seed house 
to list it, the introduction occurring in 1905. Very 
shortly afterwards it was included among Henry Fields 
collection as a pink strain of Country Gentleman. There 
is on record one trial carried out at the New Hampshire 
Experiment Station, the seed of which was obtained 
from Childs. Reports indicate that the variety was an 
extremely vigorous grower often attaining a height of 
10 and 11 feet. The ears were larger than those of 
Country Gentleman, had deeper grains, apparently 
equal in quality but later in season. The kernels in the 
milk stage were ivory white, but when mature they 
assumed a pink cast. 



This variety should not be confused with Shumway's 
Western Queen, a record of which exists in Sturtevant's 
publication (508) as well as Burrill and McClure's (91). 
This stock was apparently synonymous with Pee and 
Kay. 

Whipple's Early White. Refs. 247, 335, 345, 346, 348, 
478. Syn. Whipple Early. Illus. 25, 67. 

Introduced in 1919 by the Joseph Harris Co. of Cold- 
water, New York, Whipple's Early White quickly became 
an important variety in New York State. If it were not 
for the lessened interest in the white varieties and the 
growing importance of the yellow sorts, Whipple's Early 
White would undoubtedly be considered one of the lead- 
ing and outstanding market varieties of modern times. 
Silas S. Whipple of Norwich, Connecticut, was the origi- 
nator, and the excellence of present-day stocks is to a large 
degree the result of his continued interest in the variety. 

Mr. Whipple secured seed of an unknown sort in 1910 
from one of his customers. Mr. Greiner, the German 
gardener on a neighboring estate, had given a quantity 
of eating corn to this customer, and she having a surplus 
passed some old ears on to Mr. Whipple with the injunc- 
tion " take them home and plant them and they will 
make you rich." The first year's corn from this seed was 
ready for picking just after Crosby and before Evergreen 
and had 8, 10, and sometimes 12 rows of kernels on ears 
about a foot long. Changes in Whipple's Early White 
have been considerable since this first trial as present -day 
stocks show 14 to 18 rows. The length of the ear was 
shortened by selection to fit the length of the side dishes 
of the Wauregan Hotel, one of Mr. Whipple's principal 
customers. 

Whipple's Early White produced edible ears in 
80 days at Geneva, practically the same season as 
Vanguard, 4 days earlier than Kendel's Early Giant, 
and 5 days later than Early Mayflower. The plants 
are about the same height as those of Vanguard, having 
longer tassels and anthers more variable in color. The 
ears are borne much closer to the stalks and have longer 
and more loosely wrapped husks. The husked ears are 
slightly shorter, more cylindrical, and have four to 
six more rows with correspondingly more narrow and 
decidedly deeper kernels. Whipple's Early White has 
enjoyed wide popularity as a home and market garden 
variety. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 s i feet, vigorous; stalk moderately 
heavy, straight; nodes 8-10, prominent. Brace roots present on 
one node, moderately heavy, whorl complete, useful. Tillers, few 
present, slightly shorter than central stalk. Leaves moderately 
long and medium broad, 32-35 x 3J^-4 inches; sheath shorter than 
internode. Tassel moderately long and slender, 18-20 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets slightly drooping, moderately 
many, long, branched and rather scattered; bracts green, slightly 
striped with light red; anthers variable in color; 60-62 days to 
anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and often two ears per 
stalk, one occasionally a nubbin. Shank moderately long, 4-6 inches, 
moderately heavy but brittle. Husks many, quite heavy, rather 
loosely wrapped and easily removed. Husk leaves many, short, 
quite stiff and heavy, much darker green in color than husk. Husked 
ear medium long and moderately plump, 7-8 x l"g-2 inches; partly 
cylindrical, moderately tapering; base enlarged and compressed; tip 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



69 



abruptly conical and occasionally capped; rows 14-18, quite regular, 
but occasionally somewhat twisted and irregular at the apex, spiral 
arrangement evident in some instances, crowded around the cob. 
Kernels at milk stage white, moderately narrow, shallow and 
thick: at dry stage dull white; medium size, moderately long, nar- 
row, and decidedly thick, 1.04 x .83 X .45 cm. 100 seeds per oz.); 
oblong cr nearly rectangular in shape; crown nearly straight; 
surface very irregular with deep and abundant wrinkling; loosely 
set on cob. 

White Cob Marblehead. Refs. 169, 438, 477, 510, 
535. Syns. Early White Cob Marblehead, Extra 
Early Marblehead. Extra Early White Marble- 
head, Harbinger White Marblehead. 
For those who objected to the red cob of Nar- 
ragansett and Marblehead, this new selection was 
offered by J. J. H. Gregory in 1885. It came about 
by selection from Marblehead of the purest white ears 
by Mr. Gregory and resulted in a strain almost uniformly 
white, both cob and kernel. This whiteness, however, 
was gained at the expense of a slight decrease in earliness. 
The variety was widely listed, but since Cory was 
earlier it never became a leading variety. 

White Cory. Refs. 20, 74, 101, 121, 163, 207, 208, 220, 
221, 238, 240, 241, 262, 275, 298, 335, 345, 367, 
368, 405, 412, 450, 454, 478, 498, 508, 509, 512, 
514, 515, 516, 518, 525, 533, 546. Syns. Astor, 
Carter's Improved, Early White Cory, Extra 
Early White Cory, First Crop, First Crop Sugar, 
New Extra Early White Cory, New White Cob 
Cory, White Cob Cory, White Cob Early Cory. 
In a general description of Cory given in the 
catalog of D. M. Ferry & Co. for 1893 is the key to 
the interest placed by seedsmen in finding white cob 
selections of the several important varieties of sweet 
corn having a red color, such as Narragansett, Marble- 
head, and Cory. " All the red cobbed corns should 
be cooked quickly by dropping the ears into boiling 
water to which a little salt has been added, for if sim- 
mered over a slow fire, or allowed to stand in the water 
after cooking, the red cob will discolor the kernels." 

White Cory was first introduced by D. M. Ferry 
& Co., in 1892, after several years selection. When 
introduced the selection was not entirely free from red 
cobs, but the proportion of white to red seemed sufficient 
to justify offering it to growers. This strain was quickly 
taken up by other seedsmen and after a few years it 
practically displaced Red Cob Cory. 

Eighty-eight days were required for White Cory 
to produce edible ears at Geneva. This proved to be 
3 days later than Red Cory, about the same season as 
Early Sweet or Sugar, and 2 days earlier than Mimm's 
Hybrid. The variety produces plants that are 1 foot 
taller than those of Red Cory, more consistently tillered, 
and have longer tassels that are less streaked with red 
at the base. The husked ears are slightly longer, 
more cylindrical, and more uniformly 8-rowed. 

Plant medium tall, 5-6 feet; stalk medium slender and 
straight; nodes 9-10, slightly exposed, occasionally somewhat 
prominent ; internodes moderately streaked with pale red on exposed 
surfaces. Brace roots occasionally present, slender, not very 
useful. Tillers moderately many, slightly shorter than central 



stalk. Leaves medium long and medium broad, 28-30 x 3 !f-3% 
inches; sheath usually equal to but occasionally shorter than inter- 
node. Tassel moderately long and slender, 18-20 inches, not 
colored at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal 
to slightly drooping, many, moderately long, and moderately 
crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped with pale red; anthers 
variable in color; 63-65 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank medium long, 3-5 inches, moderately slender 
and brittle. Husks medium number and length, rather tightly 
wrapped, not easily removed. Husked ear medium long and 
slender, 7-8 x 1 . -1 : , inches, slightly tapering; base slightly 
enlarged, often open; tip long, conical and exposed; rows 8, regular, 
straight, often noticeably paired; furrows deep and moderately 
wide. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium width, rather shallow 
and thin; at the dry stage dull white, moderately small, much 
wider than long, .86 x 1.1 x .39 cm. (112 seeds per oz.); short broad 
oval in shape; crown distinctly rounded; surface sparsely and 
shallowly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

White Evergreen. Refs. 12, 42, 79, 158, 238, 241, 335, 
372, 403, 406, 460. Syns. Early White Evergreen, 
New Snow White Evergreen, New White Ever- 
green, Snow White Evergreen. 
The Burpee White Evergreen, introduced in 1903 
by W. Atlee Burpee, originated from one pure white 
ear of Stowell's Evergreen found by C. S. Clark of 
Wakeman, Ohio. After 5 years of careful work, seed was 
offered to Burpee and it became one of the important 
introductions of the new century. The attempt was 
made to get a strain with heavy light green silk and 
tassel, but about 20 per cent of the plants showed dark 
in the floral organs. 

The cob and kernels at all stages of edibility were 
beautifully white, elimination of the amber tint being of 
great value, especially to canners. The plant was 
robust and the ears large, in fact for serving on the cob 
they were considered by some to be too large. The 
young ears remained in edible condition for a long time 
and when two or more were produced on a stalk they 
came in succession thus lengthening the season for a 
given planting. The variety has been offered con- 
tinuously at least to 1926, but has had only short periods 
of popularity. 

White Mexican. Refs. 132, 238, 241, 303, 378, 403, 
533. Syns. Early Vacaville, Early White Mexican. 
White Mexican, originated by G. H. Cummings, as 
a variety name has been known since 1906, when it was 
offered as a novelty by Vaughan Seed Store of Chicago, 
Illinois. Most listings found have been from seed com- 
panies of the Middle West where the variety has attained 
some popularity. The name itself would indicate rela- 
tionship to the popular Black Mexican and there are 
several citations of this relationship, among them the 
following: Michael, 1916, " originated at Sioux City, a 
bud propagation of old Black Mexican;" Darling and 
Beaham, 1908, " several years ago some white kernels 
were discovered on a cob of Black Mexican." As grown 
at Geneva during the last few years a close resemblance 
of the various stocks was noted to Silver Bantam and 
Market Gardener's Extra Early. This indicated mixed 
stocks as well as confusion as to the actual type. 



70 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



There are few published descriptions, but that given 
in Price and Drinkard (403) published in 1908 should 
be that of the variety as introduced. 

Plant short, 3 1 _>-4 feet: stalk slender and straight; nodes 7-8, 
slightly exposed. Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, short and 
slender 6-7 x 1 " <-l J _. inches, slightly tapering; rows 8-10, rather 
uneven. Kernels at milk stage white, broad and shallow; at dry 
stage amber white, broader than long and moderately wrinkled over 
the surface of the crown. 

White Sunrise. Ref. 317. 

This is a companion variety or twin to Golden 
Sunrise, both having come through the same parent- 
age, a cross between Golden Bantam and Long Island 
Beauty. The cross was made by H. S. Mills in 1925 
on the Long Island Vegetable Research Farm at River- 
head, New York. Selection for type was made in 
1926 and continuously thereafter, until 1928 when 
Mr. Mills was employed by the D. Landreth Seed 
Co. By permission of Cornell University the stock 
seed was moved to Bristol, Pennsylvania, where further 
selection work was carried out culminating in the 
introduction of the variety by Landreth in 1932. 

At Geneva 90 days were required to produce edible 
ears. This was 2 days earlier than Metropolitan, in 
season with Mimm's Hybrid, and 2 days later than 
Howling Mob. Mill's White Sunrise produced plants 
about 1 foot taller than those of Mimm's Hybrid, 
decidedly heavier, and with tassels 4 to 6 inches shorter. 
The husked ears are slightly shorter, of equal plumpness, 
and distinctly more tapering and exposed at the tip. 
This is one of the more recently introduced varieties 
and as such cannot be adequately judged at this time. 
Its vigor and size of ear indicate possibilities as a desirable 
main-season sweet corn. 

Plant tall, 7-7?^' feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 11-12, 
exposed and prominent, internodes streaked with red on exposed 
surfaces. Brace roots present, heavy and useful, whorl complete 
on one and often two nodes. Tillers moderately many, slightly 
shorter than central stalk. Leaves medium long and medium 
broad, 30-32 x 3J^-4J^ inches; sheath shorter than internode. 
Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches, rather coarse, 
slightly streaked with red at the base, terminal spike moderately 
erect; lateral spikelets horizontal to slightly drooping, many present, 
moderately long, multi-branched and rather crowded; bracts green, 
sparsely striped with rather pale red; anthers usually buff (warm 



buff to chamois) but occasionally pale reddish bronze (terra cotta); 
65-70 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, one occasionally a nubbin. Shank moderately 
short and slender, 2-4 inches. Husks moderately many, heavy, 
short and tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately long and 
moderately plump, 8-9 x l?-jj-2 inches, slightly tapering; base 
slightly enlarged and compressed; tip conical and exposed; rows 
12-14, moderately straight, slightly irregular at the base and 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium size, moderately narrow 
and rather deep; at dry stage dull white, 1.09 x .94 x .39 cm. (128 
seeds per oz.); somewhat triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; 
surface abundantly and rather deeply wrinkled; set moderately 
loose on cob. 

Wonder of the Market. Ref. 322. 

No information concerning the origin of this sort is 
available. It had its beginning with C. J. Lindholm of 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, who also introduced it sometime 
prior to 1922. As grown at Geneva the plants were very 
small, averaging 3 to 3} o feet in height, very slender, and 
nearly devoid of tillers. The ears were borne at the 
third and fourth nodes, one and occasionally two being 
present. These were short and plump, 5 1 o to 6 x 1" g to 
1?4 inches, possessing 12 to 14 rows of rather broad, 
thick kernels. In some respects this resembled Early 
Market, being smaller in both plants and ears as well 
as slightly later in season. Inasmuch as the variety 
was discontinued in 1930, only one season's notes of 
value were obtained. 

Zig Zag Evergreen. Refs. 90, 97, 238, 328, 329, 350, 
382, 403, 404, 533. Syn. Shoe Peg Evergreen. 

This broken-row type of Evergreen corn was intro- 
duced in 1893 by Northrup, Braslan 8b Goodwin Co., 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Gregory of Marblehead, Mas- 
sachusetts, also offered it in 1896 as a novelty distinguish- 
able by " the kernels which usually run zigzag down the 
cob, whence its name." Its resemblance to Country 
Gentleman was noted in early descriptions, the ears being 
larger, sweeter, earlier, and maturing over a longer period. 

Jerome B. Rice Seed Co., Cambridge, New York, 
list Zig Zag Evergreen today as a selection from Stowell's 
Evergreen with ears densely covered with narrower, 
deep, sweet, white grain, without rows. The size of 
ear and season are the same as Stowell's Evergreen; 
the quality is fine. 



THE YELLOW-KERNELED VARIETIES OF SWEET CORN 



The varieties included in the group of yellow- 
kerneled sweet corns are united by the one character, 
color of kernel, otherwise there is no distinct or constant 
character which is common to the group. Up to the 
time the kernels on the ear begin to show this color 
differentiation, white or yellow, there does not seem to 
be any single character or correlated group of characters 
which allow even a preliminary separation into the 
white-kerneled or yellow-kerneled groups. 

For 70 years after sweet corn was considered as a 
valuable food plant for the garden, the white-kerneled 
varieties predominated. At the beginning of the 
present century there were a few yellow varieties known, 



Gold Nugget and Gold Coin being listed in the catalogs 
of most seed houses. However, the majority of those 
who considered themselves good judges as to what 
constituted the best quality sweet corn placed the 
yellow-seeded sorts in the category with horse corn or 
chicken corn. But in 1902 W. Atlee Burpee named and 
introduced Golden Bantam. Its use made friends, and 
consumer preference for yellow varieties began at that 
time. 

Golden Bantam helped to break down prejudice 
against any yellow corn. As a result there has been a 
steady increase in yellow varieties comparable to the 
earlier increase in the white varieties. In some sections 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



71 



and on some markets the preference for yellow varieties 
today amounts to nearly complete exclusion of white 
varieties. However, there are many who prefer the 
white varieties and there will continue to be many 
excellent sorts that can compete successfully with their 
yellow cousins in growth, yield, attractiveness of ear, 
and quality. Over 150 named yellow sorts were grown 
and studied for this work and 48 have been considered 
distinct and given at least a brief description. 

As the number of white varieties increased, so also 
did the types or forms increase. This same increase in 
forms is noted for the yellow corns, and while it is true 
that there are certain types of white sweet corn that 
as yet do not have their counterpart in a yellow-kerneled 
variety, yet with each succeeding decade and as the 
number of varieties increases, we find individual yellow 
varieties able to match in size, appearance, season, 
quality, etc., similar varieties among the whites. 

THE YELLOW VARIETIES OF SWEET CORN 

Bantam Evergreen. Refs. 31, 117, 136, 150, 191, 
192, 209, 335, 345, 357, 492, 525, 562. Syns. 
Delicious Bantam, Early Golden Sugar, Golden 
Evergreen, Golden Giant Evergreen, " Golden 
Rod," " Golden Sugar," Gclden Sunburst, Jumbo 
Gold. Illus. 25. 
Frederick B. Clark of the Everett B. Clark Seed 
Co., Milford. Connecticut, planted seed of Golden 
Bantam throughout a field of Stowell's Evergreen. The 
cross-pollination was continued fcr several generations 
until the dominant golden color became fixed. Selec- 
tions were made over a period of 6 years and a new type 
chesen with the color and quality of the Golden Bantam 
and the kernel pattern and size of Stowell's Evergreen. 
It was ready in 1910, but was not popularized until 1913 
when the Vaughan Seed Store of Chicago, Illinois, 
featured the new introduction as Bantam Evergreen. 
Since that time it has had wide distribution and has been 
freely recommended and widely cultivated as a large- 
eared yellow corn. In some sections it is known as 
Golden Evergreen, a name first used about 1915. 

By some, Golden Evergreen is thought to have had 
an origin independent of Bantam Evergreen. One 
strain was introduced in 1917 by Beckert's Seed Store 
of Pittsburgh. This came from a cross of Golden Ban- 
tam and White Evergreen. Charles Coolidge of Phelps, 
New York, crossed Stowell's Evergreen and Sweet Orange 
just previous to the introduction of Bantam Evergreen. 
This strain was introduced in 1922 by F. H. Ebelingof 
Syracuse, New York. It has been impossible to dis- 
tinguish the two on the basis of true separatory characters 
and early descriptions do not give a clear picture. 

Ninety days were required to reach edible maturity 
at Geneva. This proved to be 10 days to 2 weeks later 
than Golden Bantam and 10 to 15 days earlier than 
Papago Sweet. With the exception of Papago, which is 
of no importance in New York State, Bantam Ever- 
green is accepted as the most important late yellow 
variety. It is used to some extent by the canning 
industry, but has achieved its greatest importance as a 



large-eared late yellow of comparatively high quality, 
appearing on the market when most other yellows 
(planted in the normal season) are over-mature. Many 
of the fine qualities of Stowell's Evergreen have been 
retained in addition to the presence of yellow kernels. 
The plants are very vigorous, stout growers, similar to 
Golden Sunrise in this respect. Bantam Evergreen is 
more inclined to tiller than Golden Sunrise and produces 
kernels that in the dry stage are decidedly more deeply 
and abundantly wrinkled and set more loosely on the cob. 

Plant tall, 6 1 o-7' _> feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 10- 
12, exposed, prominent. Brace roots present and complete on one 
and occasionally two nodes, heavy and useful. Tillers moderately 
many, slightly shorter and occasionally equal to central stalk. 
Leaves moderately long and moderately broad, 30-32 x 3 ' £-4 inches: 
sheath shorter than and occasionally equal to the internode. Tassel 
long and heavy, 20-22 inches; terminal spike erect, lateral spikelets 
horizontal to slightly drooping, long, medium in number and evenly 
distributed; bracts green, rather heavily striped with red; anthers 
light reddish bronze (terra cotta); 64-66 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th to 7th nodes, one and very often two ears 
per stalk with an occasional nubbin present. Shank medium long, 
3—4 inches, moderately slender and brittle. Husks moderately 
heavy and medium in length. Husked ear moderately long and 
plump 8-9 x l 3 4-2 inches, moderately tapering; base enlarged and 
compressed; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 12-14, moderately 
straight, somewhat irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, large, moderately broad and 
deep; at dry stage deep amber yellow, much longer than broad, 
comparatively thin, 1.22 x .96 x .31 cm. (100 seeds per oz.); roughly 
triangular in shape; crown converging, somewhat angular; surface 
distinctly creased and very deeply and abundantly wrinkled; set 
very loosely on cob. 

Banting. Refs. 298, 333, 334, 335, 345, 346, 347, 348. 
Illus. 25. 

The climate in the prairie provinces of Canada and 
in the northern sections of nearly all provinces is rela- 
tively cool for sweet corn. Because of the importance 
of sweet corn as a food plant, the Central Experimental 
Farm at Ottawa grew in trials all varieties of early corn 
obtainable and in 1920 introduced Pickaninny which 
originated from a cross between two of the earliest 
in the trials. 

The same year, Isabella Preston crossed Pickaninny 
with Howe's Alberta Flint, a very uniform, 8-rowed, 
yellow coming from the School of Agriculture, Edmonton, 
Alberta. In 1923, after 3 years of careful work by M. B. 
Davis and T. F. Ritchie, this yellow selection was sent 
out for trial as Banting. It was the first yellow sweet 
corn to compare in season with Pickaninny and the 
Squaw corn varieties. 

Edible ears were secured in 65 days, which was 
12 days to 2 weeks earlier than Golden Bantam and 
3 to 4 days later than Golden Gem and Spanish Gold. 
Its value has been chiefly attributed to its earliness. 
The ears are considered too small, however, to be of 
great importance as a market garden variety in New 
York. The plants of this variety are more vigorous 
and will average 1 foot taller than Golden Gem. Like- 
wise, the ear shanks are longer with husks and husk 
leaves longer and more abundant. The husked ears are 
slightly more slender, while the kernels in the dry stage 
are considerably deeper yellow in color. 



72 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant moderately short, 4*2-5 feet; stalks slender and moder- 
ately straight; nodes 7-8, covered, not prominent. Brace roots 
and tillers usually absent. Leaves moderately short and narrow, 
25-27 x 2JO-3 1 o inches; sheath longer than and occasionally equal to 
internode. Tassel short and slender, 12-15 inches; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, few, short and scattered; bracts 
and anthers variable in color; 48-50 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank medium in length, 3-4 inches, slender. 
Husk leaves many, long and heavy; husks few, rather short and 
wrapped moderately tight. Husked ear moderately short and 
slender, 6-7 x l^-l'j inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering; 
base compressed and tip conical, occasionally capped; rows 8-10, 
regular, straight, occasionally paired on 8-rowed specimens. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, moderately small and distinctly 
shallow; at dry stage bright, orange-yellow, moderately broad and 
short, .86 x 1.05 x .37 cm. (135 seeds per oz.1; broad oval in shape; 
crown rounded; surface abundantly but rather shallowly wrinkled; 
set moderately tight on cob. 

Burbank. Refs. 68, 69, 112, 335, 348, 492, 562. Syn. 
Burbank Bantam. 

Luther Burbank, for whom this variety was named, 
at one time was a market gardener depending largely 
on producing his crops earlier than his neighbors. Living 
at Lunenburg, Massachusetts, and marketing most of 
his produce at Fitchburg, he experimented with various 
cultural practices and later with crossing in order to 
obtain an earlier and larger eared sweet corn. The 
crosses were made between 1870 and 1875, at which time 
he says, " the varieties Black Mexican, common sweet 
corn, and New England Yellow field corn were used." 
Nothing of promise was noted. Later from a cross 
between Early Minnesota and a yellow field corn some 
yellow hybrids were produced which retained the 
character of sweetness. Before these characters could 
be thoroughly fixed Burbank moved to California 
where the pressure of other work necessitated the cur- 
tailment of his corn breeding experiments. 

It is quite probable that after the turn of the century 
Burbank again experimented with sweet corn and that 
the variety first distributed as a " New Bantam " 
came from a series of crosses. The Burbank catalog of 
1921 in announcing the variety as " Burbank " states 
that there were 16 years of careful selection work before 
its introduction or naming. The variety has not made 
progress in the listings of popular varieties, and where 
10 years ago it was commonly found, it is seldom offered 
today. 

Edible ears were produced in 81 days, 2 to 3 days 
later than Golden Bantam, but ordinarily it can be 
considered in the same season. The variety is used to 
some extent by canners and also by market gardeners 
whose trade requires an ear with more rows than regular 
Bantam and which will retain much of the quality. 
The variety most resembles the 10- to 14-rowed Golden 
Bantam, although the number of rows per ear will 
average greater. The stalks are usually heavier, slightly 
shorter, and less inclined to tiller. Ears are slightly 
plumper, contain a greater number of rows, and are 
more aburptly tapered at the tip. 

Plant moderately short, 4 1 _>-5 feet; stalks coarse, moderately 
heavy and straight; nodes 8-10, covered, not prominent. Tillers 
few, much shorter than central stalk. Leaves medium long and 



narrow, 28-30 x 2%-3 x ■! inches; sheath longer than and occasionally 
equal to the internode. Tassel short and slender, 12-15 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, medium length, 
moderately many, and crowded; bracts green, moderately striped 
with red; anthers light reddish brown (terra cotta); 62-64 days to 
anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank short, 2-3 inches, brittle. Husk leaves few 
and short; husks moderately few, heavy and short. Husked ear 
medium long and plump, 7-8 x 1?4~2 inches, moderately tapering 
and partly cylindrical; base slightly enlarged and compressed; tip 
abruptly conical; rows 12-16, moderately straight but often dis- 
tinctly irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at the milk stage light orange yellow, medium width 
and depth; at dry stage dull yellow, medium size, slightly broader 
than long, 1.0 x 1.1 x .35 cm. (104 seeds per oz.); roughly triangular 
in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface moderately wrinkled, 
often rather shallow; set slightly loose on cob. 

Burpee. Refs. 84, 298, 345, 346, 348, 475, 534. Syns. 
Earliest Yellow, Golden Pacific, Tangerine. 

This is one variety that did not originate in or near 
New England, the cradle of sweet corn varieties. In 
fact, it was near the little town of Nooksack located 
within a few miles of the very northeast corner of the 
state of Washington that George G. Shelton began his 
experiment that led in 1927 to the introduction of 
Burpee. Mr. Shelton in 1917 planted some hills of 
Metropolitan next to a dent corn called Bloody Butcher. 
This is described in Ebeling's catalog as with stalks 
medium in height, fairly heavy, ears with 14 rows, color 
of kernel a deep cherry red with white cap. A further 
note says " worms and birds do not bother Bloody 
Butcher very much and for that reason it is much 
sought after by the southern planter." At harvest 
time some of the ears of the field variety were kept for 
seed. On one ear there were 10 or 12 grains of sweet 
corn. These were planted the following year next 
to some Golden Bantam. Only two stalks grew and 
one of these developed two ears of a chocolate color. 
The next year in 1919, seed from the ears were planted 
in two short rows adjacent to Golden Bantam and 
again crossing occurred. The plants of the chocolate 
corn tasseled early and were hardy and productive. 
For 3 years the process of selecting and planting the 
yellow kernels from the chocolate-colored ears was 
repeated in an attempt to fix a yellow sweet corn. In 
1924, the seed was moved south to Wapato in the 
Yakima Valley, and after 2 years of selection, a com- 
paratively pure strain became established. This Mr. 
Shelton named Golden Pacific, but when in 1927 the 
variety was introduced, the name was changed to 
Burpee by the seed organization bearing that name. 

Edible maturity was reached at Geneva in 72 days, 
6 days earlier than Golden Bantam and 10 to 12 days 
later than Golden Gem and Spanish Gold. It is used 
as an early productive sort of more than ordinary 
quality. Although the ears are small, they are rather 
delicately kerneled and attractive, rendering the variety 
of value to the early trucker and home garden enthusiast. 
The plants are about 1 foot shorter than Golden Bantam, 
produce more tillers, and therefore present the appear- 
ance of being more bushy. Kernels are more narrow 




BUTTERCUP 



(Four -fifths natural size) 




(Four-fifths natural size 



CHARLEVOIX 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



73 



and often more wrinkled: ears are about the same length 
as those of Bantam but much more plump. 

Plant moderately short, 4 ' £-4$4 feet, stalks slender and moder- 
ately straight; nodes 7-8, covered, not prominent. Brace roots not 
present. Tillers moderately many, slightly shorter than and 
occasionally equal to central stalk. Leaves short and moderately 
narrow, 24-26 x 3 ' j-3 ' $ inches; sheath longer than internode. Tassel 
short and slender, 12-15 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
short, nearly erect, many present, rather crowded and usually 
simple; bracts green, sparsely striped with red; anthers variable 
in color; 52-54 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, often two ears per stalk. 
Shank moderately variable in length. Husks brittle, few, quite 
thick and rather tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately short 
and plump, 6-7 x 1 5 > -1 3 1 inches, nearly cylindrical with a slight 
taper near the tip; rows 12-14, usually regular and straight, uniform 
and attractive. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, medium size, rather shallow 
and medium width; at dry stage dull yellow, medium long and 
rather narrow, 1.1 x .92 x .32 cm. (140 seeds per oz.); triangular 
in shape; crown rounded; surface rather finely and abundantly 
wrinkled; set moderately tight on cob. 

Buttercup. Refs. 247, 335, 345, 478, 525. Illus. 72. 

No one questions the supremacy of Golden Bantam 
in the entire group of yellow sweet corns. When it 
comes to choosing a 5 r ellow variety that can be termed 
second best, we are confronted with the problem of 
evaluating the qualities of earliness, size of ear, and 
quality. On the basis of quality and attractiveness of 
ear Buttercup has much to commend it to all who are 
growing for home use or for a discriminating market. 
Joseph Harris Co., Coldwater, New York, were the intro- 
ducers in 1910, after securing the seed for increase from 
A. H. Drake of East Brookfield, Massachusetts. Mr. 
Drake was a market gardener who lived in the rather 
high section of central Massachusetts. This region has 
many lakes which induce a large perennial summer popu- 
lation as a market for fresh vegetables. This trade 
invariably choose the Buttercup corn grown by Mr. 
Drake in preference to any other. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 78 days, 
identical in season to Golden Bantam. 6 days later than 
Golden Sunshine and about 5 days earlier than Golden 
Giant. This variety is used by growers who desire a 
longer and slightly more plump ear than Golden Bantam. 
It has been found to be quite sweet and tender, although 
somewhat lacking in flavor as manifested in Golden 
Bantam. Its long ears with large kernels of a rich 
yellow color which are sweet and tender cause many to 
consider Buttercup even better in quality than Golden 
Bantam. It most resembles Barden's Wonder Bantam 
in type, the plants being more slender, lighter green in 
foliage, and less inclined to tiller. The edible ears will 
also tend to be more cylindrical with a larger proportion 
of 8-rowed specimens present and more completely 
filled with kernels at the tip. 

Plant medium tall, 5? ^—6 feet; stalks slender, moderately 
zigzag; nodes 8-9, exposed, prominent. Brace roots present, 
useful, moderately heavy, whorl complete on one node. Tillers, 
many present, nearly as tall as central stalk. Leaves moderately 
long and moderately broad, 30-32 x 3 l jr~ * inches; sheath shorter 
than internode. Tassel moderately long and slender, 20-22 inches; 
terminal spike slightly drooping; lateral spikelets drooping, moder- 
ately many, multi-branched at the base; bracts green, distinctly I 



striped with moderately deep red; anthers variable in color; 58-60 
days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk, with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Shank variable in length, 
usually rather long, 6-8 inches, moderately heavy. Husks many, 
moderately short, and rather tightly wrapped, easily removed. 
Husked ear moderately long and moderately slender, 8-9 x 1 ' 1 
inches, partly cylindrical, tapering near the apex; rows 8-10, usually 
regular, occasionally paired on 8-rowed specimens. 

Kernels at milk stage pale orange yellow, moderately large, 
wide, moderately thin and medium depth; at dry stage, dull orange 
yellow, wider than long, .89 x 1.03 x .35 cm. (116 seeds per oz.); 
short, broad ovate in shape; crown rounded; surface abundantly 
and very finely wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Carmel Golden. Ref. 379. 

So far this variety has found a place only in Cali- 
fornia where it was first introduced in 1923 by C. C. 
Morse 8s Co. of San Francisco. The small-eared 
varieties, either white or yellow, such as Cory, Early 
Market, and Golden Bantam, are not popular in Cali- 
fornia with either grower or consumer. Ears must be 
big and therefore this selection was made from Golden 
Bantam as a strain having ears with more rows and a 
longer cob. The careful work of selection was done by 
Mr. Andrew Stewart, a rancher in the Carmel Valley. 

Eighty days were required for the edible ears to 
reach maturity at Geneva. This proved to be 2 days 
later than Golden Bantam and 3 days earlier than Golden 
Giant. This variety is used extensively in certain areas 
of California where it is claimed to be more adaptable. 
As grown at Geneva, the plant is shorter than Golden 
Bantam, more stocky, and possesses leaves that are 
much broader than any other in its class. It has often 
been considered similar to Charlevoix, but in the tests 
at Geneva Charlevoix proved to be a more vigorous, 
slender grower, producing ears that were finer kerneled 
and much more attractive. 

Plant moderately short, 4? 4-4 '4 feet; stalks moderately heavy 
and straight; nodes 7-8, covered, not prominent. Tillers many, 
much shorter than central stalk. Leaves medium long and dis- 
tinctly broad, 28-30 x 4-4 J^ inches; sheath longer than internode. 
Tassel moderately short, 14—16 inches, heavy and coarse, terminal 
spike erect, lateral spikelets moderately drooping, many, long, and 
rather evenly distributed; bracts and anthers variable in color; 
58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Shank short, 2-3 inches, 
brittle. Husk leaves many, short, and moderately heavy; husks 
many, moderately short and heavy, wrapped rather tightly. Husked 
ear moderately long and medium plump, 8-9 x 1 •' g-1 J g inches, partly 
cylindrical and slightly tapering; tip conical and usually exposed; 
rows 10-12, inclined to be somewhat irregular, often spiral to curved, 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light to medium yellow, medium size 
and depth; at dry stage amber yellow, moderately broad, long, and 
thick, 1.1 x .99 x .4 cm. (112 seeds per oz.); roughly triangular in 
shape; crown slightly rounded; surface very rough, coarse, often 
deeply ridged and creased, rather coarsely wrinkled; set moderately 
tight on the cob. 

Charlevoix. Refs. 124, 130, 176, 344, 413, 562. Syn. 
Gold Standard. Illus. 25, 73. 
Although listed in the 1933 catalog of the introducer 
as Gold Standard, this variety has been known as 
Charlevoix since its introduction in 1917 by the D. M. 
Ferry Co. of Detroit. In 1895, F. J. Meech, a farmer at 



74 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Charlevoix, Michigan, and known as one of the best 
gardeners of the state, received some seed from a friend 
in New England. The seed was planted and its progeny 
grown and reselected by Mr. Meech and his neighbors 
for many years. It was subsequently obtained and 
introduced by D. M. Ferry, 22 years later. For many 
years it had retained its popularity among the summer 
visitors of northern Michigan. This is one more of the 
important yellow varieties that can be traced back to 
New England. 

Charlevoix reached edible maturity at Geneva 
in 78 days, the same as Golden Bantam. This was 
6 days later than Golden Sunshine and 5 days earlier 
than Golden Giant. Plants of Charlevoix are slightly 
shorter and more stocky than Golden Bantam, more 
like a good strain of 10- to 14-row Golden Bantam in 
this respect. The ears are more uniform and attractive 
than 10- to 14-rowed Bantam, with dry ears showing 
kernels with greater uniformity in wrinkling. This 
sweet corn has found considerable favor in the eyes of 
the three important users of sweet corn — the home 
gardener, market gardener, and canner. 

Plant medium tall, 4 1 ; >-5 feet; stalks slender, straight; nodes 
8-9, usually covered, not prominent; internodes often blotched with 
red on exposed portions. Brace roots present, slender, whorl 
complete on one node, useful. Tillers many present, nearly as 
tall as central stalk. Leaves rather short and moderately narrow, 
22-24 x 3'4-3 S 4 inches; sheath usually longer than internode, 
although occasionally equal to it. Tassel moderately short and 
stout, 14—15 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets moder- 
ately drooping, slender, many present, quite crowded, usually 
simple; bracts green, rather heavily striped with red; anthers bronze 
red (dark vinaceous); 60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, often two ears per stalk. 
Shank variable, 2-8 inches, rather slender and brittle. Husk 
leaves small, short, and few present; husks moderately many, 
rather thin, wrapped moderately tight. Silk usually red, moderate 
amount, short, easily removed from cob. Husked ear medium 
long and moderately plump, 7-8 x 1 3 4 — 2 inches; partly cylindrical, 
and slightly tapering, attractive; base rounded and compressed; 
tip broadly conical, usually well filled; rows 10-12, regular, crowded 
around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, medium width, moderately thin 
and medium depth; at dry stage deep yellow, medium size, 1.0 x 
.9 x .38 cm. (124 seeds per oz.i; distinctly triangular in shape; 
crown gently rounded; surface heavily wrinkled, usually rather 
deep and rough; set moderately loose on cob. 

Cream and Honey. Ref. 47. 

From 1911 to 1929 the J. Bolgiano Seed Co. of 
Baltimore, Maryland, offered this variety with the 
name that " carries the mind back to the ' Promised 
Land ' flowing with ' Milk and Honey.' ' During this 
time it was a 10- to 12 -row type with ears from 5 to 
6 inches long. The variety as grown in our trials and 
offered after 1930 produced an 8-rowed ear and, as 
advertised, was a selected strain of Golden Bantam. 

Early Golden. Refs. 6, 226, 233, 348, 464. Syn. 
Early Golden Improved. 
At Yankton, South Dakota, the Gurney Seed Co. 
originated this sweet corn, a cross between Golden 
Bantam and Early Evergreen. First offered in 1908, 
it has been featured by them until 1930 when it was . 



replaced by Golden Sunshine. Aggeler and Musser 
Seed Co. of Los Angeles, California, and Thos. J. Grey 
Co. of Boston, Massachusetts, have also listed the variety 
as a second early to follow Golden Bantam. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 82 days, 
8 days earlier than Bantam Evergreen, about equal in 
season to Golden Giant, and 10 days later than Sun- 
shine. Edible ears resemble Golden Giant, although the 
kernels are slightly smaller, and more finely wrinkled. 
The plants are much taller, with tassels longer, both 
terminal and lateral spikes and spikelets, than Golden 
Giant. In this respect it is more like Bantam Evergreen. 
Dry ears are more slender than Bantam Evergreen, with 
kernels somewhat smaller but nearly as loosely set on 
the cob. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6 1 .) feet; stalks straight and medium 
slender; nodes 9-10, usually covered to slightly exposed, not very 
prominent. Brace roots occasionally present, rather slender, whorl 
complete on one node. Tillers many, nearly as tall as central 
stalk. Tassel moderately long, 18-20 inches, rather slender. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Husks many, moderately long, heavy and rather 
tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and moderately 
plump, 7-8 x l 3 4 -l"s inches, moderately tapering; tip abruptly 
conical; rows 12-16, moderately straight, somewhat irregular at 
the base. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, medium size, rather narrow 
on 16-rowed ears, deep; at dry stage, bright orange yellow, longer 
than broad, 1.1. x .9 x .36 cm. (144 seeds per oz. I; triangular; crown 
slightly rounded; surface rather abundantly but shallowly wrinkled; 
set moderately loose on cob. 

Early Golden Sunrise. Ref. 152. 

This variety originated on the farm of George S. 
Steele at Hudson, New Hampshire. Thos. W. Emerson 
Co. of Boston, became interested in the variety and 
introduced it in 1914. After 19 years of listing Golden 
Bantam, they credit Emerson's Early Golden Sunrise 
corn as the best golden corn they ever cataloged. 
Inasmuch as the name Golden Sunrise has been used 
with several other introductions, the term Early is 
associated with this strain to distinguish it from the 
Golden Sunrise offered by D. Landreth Co. 

Edible ears were produced in 84 days at Geneva, 
6 days later than Golden Bantam and about the same 
season as Golden Giant. It most resembles Golden 
Orange in plant characters, although it is much less 
inclined to tiller. The ears are somewhat more slender 
and with fewer rows. It is used in certain areas of the 
New England states by canners and growers " who 
insist upon procuring the highest grade of sweet corn 
for their most critical trade." 

Plant medium tall, 5j£-6 feet; stalks medium heavy and 
moderately straight; nodes 8-9; brace roots present, with whorl 
complete on one node, tillers few, much shorter than central stalk. 
Tassel medium long and slender, 16-18 inches; lateral spikelets 
horizontal to slightly drooping, many present and rather crowded. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Husked ears medium long and moderately plump, 
7-8 x lfg-l 7 * inches, moderately tapering; rows 10-12, usually 
straight and regular. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow; medium width and depth; at 
dry stage dull amber yellow, slightly longer than broad; triangular 
in shape. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



75 



Early Golden Wonder. Ref. 321. 

A selection from a cross between Extra Early Goose 
and Golden Bantam was offered in 1922 by C. J. Lind- 
holm, Minneapolis, Minnesota. The variety evidently 
was not well fixed in type nor well adapted for market 
use, for after several years it disappeared from all 
listings. 

Plant moderately short, 4 1 _>-5 feet; stalks slender and straight. 
Tillers many. Tassels long, lateral spikelets many, medium long 
and crowded. Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasion- 
ally two ears per stalk. Husks many, medium heavy and long; silk 
long and abundant, red. Husked ear moderately short and moder- 
ately slender, 6-7 x l'o-l's inches, slightly tapering; rows 10-12 
regular, straight and crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, narrow and shallow; at dry 
stage dull yellow, very small, somewhat triangular. 

Early Orange. Refs. 22, 89, 91, 290, 405, 432, 482, 
507, 508, 537, 538. Syns. Brighton Orange, 
Early Orange Sugar, Orange. 
The method commonly used by growers for nearly a 
hundred years to produce new varieties of sweet corn 
was to cross those available and by careful observa- 
tions select the outstanding progeny. In 1883, Hiram 
Sibley of Rochester, New York, introduced a new 
hybrid resulting from a cross between Narragansett 
and Moore's Early Concord. About 5 years had been 
used in segregating this sweet corn of an entirely new 
color. We are placing it in the yellow group partially 
because of the name and also because in some of the 
early descriptions the kernel is given as a light flesh red 
with a slight perceptible orange tint. The two parents 
are discussed in the white sweet corn section where it is 
well to note that each parent resulted from crossing types 
that were very distinct in ear characters. Comparing 
the kernels of this with the present Golden Orange, we 
find the modern strain with rather narrow deep kernels 
whereas the older type had kernels as broad as deep. 

Plant moderately tall, 6 feet. Ears borne 30 inches from the 
ground; husked ear moderately short and moderately plump, 
6-7 x l 3 4~ljs inches, moderately tapering; tip abruptly conical to 
rounded; rows 12—14. 

Kernels dull yellow; at dry stage light flesh red with a slight 
orange tint; as broad as deep; crown slightly rounded; surface 
finely wrinkled. 

Early Yellow Sensation. Ref. 566. 

This comparatively new variety, originated and 
introduced in 1931 by F. H. Woodruff & Sons of Milford, 
Connecticut, came from a cross between Extra Early 
Yellow and Golden Bantam. During the last 10 years 
there has been a large number of new yellow varieties 
introduced, most of which have originated from crosses 
using Golden Bantam as one parent. The object of 
the various crosses has been to produce changes in two 
directions, viz., earliness and ear size. This variety 
as noted below may have both earliness and size; at 
least the variety is on probation before its rightful 
place can be assumed. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 72 days, 
6 days earlier than Golden Bantam, in season with 
Burpee and 4 days later than Golden Early Market. 
The plants most resemble those of Golden Early Market, 



but the husked edible ears are slightly longer and 
decidedly more tapering. In the dry stage the ears 
most resemble Burpee both in color and narrowness of 
grains as well as in ear conformation. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5'j feet; stalks rather coarse and 
decidedly zigzag; nodes 8-9, exposed, very prominent, exposed por- 
tions of internodes usually solid dark red. Tillers few, much shorter 
than the central stalk. Leaves short and moderately narrow, 24-26 
x 3-3 ! 2 inches; sheath much shorter than internode. Tassel moder- 
ately short and slender, 15-16 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral 
spikelets nearly erect, many, short and crowded; bracts dark green, 
moderately striped with light red; anthers variable in color; 54-55 
days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Husk leaves moderately many, 
short and distinctly pendant; husks short, moderately heavy, 
wrapped loosely but easily removed. Husked ear medium long 
and moderately plump, 7-8 x 1 3 t — 1 ~ ^ inches, tapering, tip sharply 
conical; rows 12-16, usually regular but occasionally somewhat 
twisted at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, medium size; at dry stage 
distinctly pale amber yellow, medium wide and long, 1.06 x .90 x 
.36 cm. (108 seeds per oz.); definitely triangular in shape; crown 
rounded; surface quite deeply ridged and wrinkled; embryo dis- 
tinctly long, broad and prominent; tightly set on cob. 

Giant Golden Sweet, Carpenter's. Ref. 225. Syn. 
Carpenter's Golden Sweet. 

For several years after the introduction of Golden 
Bantam a seed house offered other yellow varieties 
only with some sort of an apology. Gregory in 1911 
said, " The demand we have had for the Golden Bantam 
and the Golden Honey during the past two years shows 
us that the Golden sweet varieties are meeting with 
popular approval. We feel justified in presenting to 
our friends this season the Carpenter's Golden Sweet, 
which came to us from a party in Pennsylvania bearing 
that name. As a special feature of its high quality the 
variety supposedly does not have that mealy taste so 
characteristic of the yellow varieties." Thus, we see 
that 9 years after the yellow Golden Bantam was 
introduced there were still certain prejudices against 
yellow corn in general that had not been abated. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 81 days, 
3 days later than Golden Bantam, 6 days after Sweet 
Orange, and 2 days earlier than Golden Giant. The 
plants are much taller than Golden Giant and possess 
foliage that is lighter green in color, much broader, 
and more abundant. In comparison to Sweet Orange, 
the variety it most resembles, plants are about 1 foot 
taller and decidedly heavier. The ears are very similar, 
altho Sweet Orange tends to be somewhat more slender 
with two to four less rows and with kernels that in the 
milk stage are a deeper orange color, although in later 
stages the two varieties are less distinct in this respect. 

Plant tall, 6-6'_> feet; stalks moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 10-12, usually covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, 
moderately heavy and useful, whorl complete on one node. Tillers 
usually many present. Leaves long and broad, 32-34 x 4-4J ■> inches; 
sheath usually equal to but occasionally longer than internode. 
Tassel moderately long, 18-20 inches, solid dark green at the base; 
terminal spike moderately erect; lateral spikelets drooping, moder- 
ately long, many, rather crowded, but evenly distributed; bracts 
green, sparsely striped with red; anthers buff color (chamois to 
deep colonial buff); 64-65 days to anthesis. 



76 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Ears borne at 4th and 6th nodes, one ear per stalk with an addi- 
tional nubbin usually present. Shank moderately short, 3-4 inches, 
slender and brittle. Husk leaves few and rather short; husks long, 
moderately heavy and rather tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium 
long and moderately plump, 7-8 x l :! t -2 inches, partly cylindrical 
and slightly tapering; rows 14-16, straight, crowded around the 
cob, very attractive. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, narrow, thick and rather 
shallow; at dry stage distinctly deep orange, very small, .95 x .8 x 
.33 cm. (200 seeds per oz.); ovate, occasionally somewhat triangular; 
crown distinctly rounded; surface abundantly and very finely 
wrinkled; set very tightly and firmly on cob. 

Gold Bond. Ref. 307. 

This variety was selected from Golden Giant and 
offered about 1929 by the Kilgore Seed Co. of Florida. 
Since it is a straight selection from Golden Giant, which 
is of hybrid origin, it is perhaps subject to small varia- 
tions of plant and ear. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 76 days, 
7 days earlier than Golden Giant, the variety it most 
resembles, and 4 days later than Golden Sunshine. 
Because of its apparent vigor and productiveness, it 
has been used with some success in some of the southern 
states where difficulty has been experienced in producing 
true sweet corn varieties. The plants of Gold Bond 
are slightly taller than Golden Giant but decidedly more 
stocky and more inclined to tiller. The foliage is also 
a darker green with leaves much longer and broader 
than those of Golden Giant. The ears are slightly 
longer and will average two less rows, although the 
differences in this respect are not very noticeable. 

Plant medium tall, 5 ] 2~6 feet, very coarse and bushy, stout; 
stalks moderately heavy and slightly zigzag; nodes 9-10, covered, 
not prominent. Tillers many, nearly as tall as central stalk. 
Leaves long and broad, 34-36 x 4H- ! 2 inches; sheath longer than 
internode. Tassel moderately long and heavy, 18-20 inches; 
terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets drooping, many, long and 
crowded; bracts green, moderately striped with red; anthers buff 
color (chamois to deep colonial buff); 58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one ear per stalk with a fair 
sized nubbin present. Shank short and heavy, 2-3 inches. Husk 
leaves short, many and possess a shade of green very similar to the 
husks; husks moderately few, rather short and rather tightly 
wrapped. Husked ear moderately long and plump, 7-9 x l%-1 
inches, moderately tapering, often somewhat cylindrical; rows 
12-14, regular and straight, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage maize yellow to pale orange, moderately 
narrow and medium depth; at the dry stage deep yellow, medium 
width and moderately long, .88 x 1.1 x .40 cm. (130 seeds per oz.); 
triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface rough and 
rather deeply and abundantly wrinkled; set moderately loose on 
cob. 

Gold Coin. Ref. 86. Syn. New Yellow. Illus. 25, 26. 

This variety was offered by Burpee in 1930 and in 
our trials has shown considerable promise. A New 
Jersey market gardener, E. R. Stover, offered seed 
to Burpee in 1928 and it was grown in their trials in 
1929. Mr. Stover had named it " New Yellow," but 
when Burpee accepted it as a new variety the name was 
changed to Gold Coin. 

At Geneva 76 days were required for ears to reach 
edible maturity, which proved to be 1 week earlier than 
Golden Giant, 2 days earlier than Golden Bantam, and 
4 days later than Golden Sunshine. The plants of | 



Gold Coin show much less red than Golden Giant, 
produce decidedly more tillers, and consequently present 
a much more bushy habit of growth. The husked ear 
will average slightly longer with less rows and is more 
attractive. Kernels at the milk stage are lighter yellow 
and somewhat broader. The variety has not been 
sufficiently well known to warrant any logical criticism 
at this time. Its performance at Geneva has been 
favorable in respect to earliness, vigor, quality, and 
attractiveness. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 1 j feet, stalks slender and moderately 
straight; nodes 8-9, covered, not prominent; internodes blotched 
with red at base. Brace roots present and complete on one node, 
useful. Tillers moderately many, nearly as tall as central stalk; 
entire plant assumes rather stocky, bushy habit. Leaves medium 
long and moderately broad, 28-30 x 3 1 £-4 inches; sheath distinctly 
longer than internode. Tassel moderately short and stout, 14-15 
inches, terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, many, 
long, and crowded; bracts pale green, moderately striped with red; 
anthers buff (chamois to deep colonial buff) ; 58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present. Shank usually short and heavy. Husks 
many, thick, moderately long and loosely wrapped. Husked ear 
moderately long and plump, 8-9 x l?4-2 inches, partly cylindrical 
and slightly tapering; tip broadly conical; rows 12-14, regular 
straight, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage moderately light yellow, broad, rather 
thin and medium deep; at dry stage deep yellow, moderately large, 
1.04 x 1.0 x .39 cm. (116 seeds per oz.): roughly triangular in shape; 
crown rounded; surface very rough and coarsely wrinkled; rather 
irregular with deep folds and creases. Set moderately loose on cob. 

Gold Coin, Livingston's. Refs. 22, 23, 90, 91, 92, 
94, 120, 121, 125, 188, 274, 275, 322, 367, 411, 
509, 510, 512, 514, 536, 537, 538. Syn. New 
Gold Coin. 
Under this name there were two distinct introduc- 
tions, one offered simultaneously in 1890 by Livingston 
and Gregory as Gold Coin, and the other not appearing 
until 40 years later, 1930, as Burpee's Gold Coin. The 
source of the first Gold Coin is not definitely known, 
although it supposedly came from a cross between a 
yellow dent and Stowell's Evergreen. However note- 
worthy its qualifications, Gold Coin was not listed by 
Livingston after 1900; in fact the catalogs of that firm 
carried no other yellow until Golden Bantam was 
accepted in 1910. Gregory, in 1906, says, " Several 
years ago a golden sweet corn was catalogued (we believe 
the name was ' Gold Coin '). It was very late and 
besides had a disagreeable field corn flavor." 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet, stalks heavy and stout; tillers moderately 
few. Tassel long; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets many, 
crowded and bushy. Ears borne 2 ' i-3 ' o feet from the ground. 
Husked ear long and plump, 9-10 x 2-2 '3 inches, partly cylindrical 
and slightly tapering, tips abruptly conical to rounded; rows 14—16, 
regular, straight, crowded around the cob. Kernels at milk stage 
pale yellow in color; at dry stage large, much longer than broad; 
crown nearly flat; surface much wrinkled and creased; set very 
loosely on cob. 

Gold Nugget. Ref. 111. 

One of the novelties offered in 1914 by John Lewis 
Childs, Floral Park, New York, was a very dwarf yellow 
sweet corn from Maine. In growth the plant did 
not exceed 2 to 3 feet and the ears were set low on the 




GOLD COIN 



(Three-quarters natural size) 




GOLDEN BANTAM 



(Natural sue) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



77 



stalk. Naturally, such a variety was of value only to 
home gardeners. 

Golden Age, Lord's. Refs. 348, 497. Illus. 25. 

For 4 years, 1929 to 1932, this was offered by Francis 
C. Stokes & Co. of Philadelphia, as a highly productive 
variety earlier than Golden Bantam. Evidently, from 
the appearance of the dry ear, it is a hybrid stock of 
Golden Bantam and Dighton parentage. James E. 
Lord of Stonington, Connecticut, was the originator 
and for 8 years prior to its introduction in 1929 by 
Stokes used the strain successfully to produce his earliest 
market corn. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 76 days; 
2 days earlier than Golden Bantam and 4 days later 
than Golden Sunshine. The plants are shorter and 
more slender than those of Golden Bantam, while the 
tassels are shorter and with fewer laterals. The ears 
are usually 10-rowed, with kernels much more narrow 
than those of Bantam. In the dry stage the kernels 
assume a bronze tinge unlike any other yellow variety. 

Plant moderately short, 4-}£-5 feet, stalks slender and moder- 
ately straight: nodes 6-7, usually slightly exposed, not prominent. 
Tillers few to none. Leaves short and moderately broad, 22-25 x 
3'_>-4 inches; sheath equal to and occasionally shorter than inter- 
node. Tassel short and slender, 12-15 inches; terminal spike erect: 
lateral spikelets nearly erect, few, short, and not crowded; bracts and 
anthers variable in color; 56-57 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank long and slender, 3-6 inches. Husk leaves 
few and short; husks moderately few, light, short and loosely 
WTapped. Husked ear moderately short and slender, 6—7 x IJ4-IJ2 
inches, moderately tapering, partly cylindrical; tip sharply conical; 
rows 8-10, straight, quite noticeably paired, not crowded around 
the cob, furrows deep and narrow when present. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, small and shallow; at dry stage 
reddish yellow, equal in width and length, .99 x .98 x .38 cm. (128 
seeds per oz. : short broad oval, almost square in shape; crown 
slightly rounded: surface sparsely and very shallowly wrinkled; 
set tightly on cob. 

Golden Alpha. Ref. 476. 

This new variety, introduced in 1932, is as yet 
untried in the gardens and markets of most of the 
United States. C. S. Clark 85 Sons, Wakeman, Ohio, 
corn seed growers since 1878, have for some time been 
working to produce better varieties of yellow corns. 
C. A. Barden of that firm crossed Alpha with his earlier 
introduction, Barden's Wonder Bantam, to combine 
earliness and quality. The variety which was created 
and selected was introduced as the trend toward yellow 
sweet corn was very definite and also as the new and 
larger hybrid inbreds were becoming more popular. 

Edible ears were produced in about 74 to 76 days 
at Geneva, which was 3 to 4 days earlier than Golden 
Bantam and about the same number of days later than 
Golden Sunshine. The plants are more stocky and 
bear their ears higher up on the plant than does Golden 
Bantam. 

Plant medium heigkt, 4jj— 5 feet; stalks sturdy and vigorous; 
tillers many, clightly shorter than antral stalk. Ears borne at 
4th and 5th nodes: husks medium in number and moderately 
tight wrapped. Husked ears medium long and moderately slender, 
6-8 x 1 J j-1 . inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering at apex; 
rows uniformly somewhat open at the base. Kernels at milk stage 



yellow, medium size, shallow; at dry stage dull amber yellow, wider 
than long; broad ovate in shape; crown decidedly rounded, nearly 
semi-circular. 

Golden Bantam. Refs. 28, 56, 79, 103, 124, 127, 132, 

136, 180, 205, 238, 248, 295, 298, 335, 344, 345, 

347, 348, 365, 384, 399, 403, 406, 413, 460, 467, 

480, 490, 493, 499, 525, 546, 564. Syns. Beauty 

Bantam, Gold Medal, Golden Glory, Golden 

West, Pure Gold, Sweet Bantam. Illus. 25, 27. 

Golden Bantam was introduced by W. Atlee 

Burpee Company in 1902. This is the best and most 

favorably known of all the yellow varieties of sweet 

corn. The type represented here has been in common 

cultivation in the United States for perhaps 70 years 

and was known at various times as Golden, Golden 

Sweet, Golden Sugar, Golden Nugget, etc., but it 

remained for the late W. Atlee Burpee to popularize it 

under the name Golden Bantam. The following is an 

excerpt from the Boston Transcript of August, 1926: 

" More than fifty years ago Hovey 8b Company, 
seed merchants of Boston, sold to all comers their 
Golden Sweet, a variety which was the direct progenitor 
of the modern Golden Bantam. It is related that one 
of their customers, a very enthusiastic amateur gardener, 
grew the Golden Sweet for many years, selecting and 
refining the gold until he had produced the substantial 
improvements which characterize the newer variety. 
When this old gentleman died his contribution to a 
higher civilization was sold to one of the big seedsmen. 

" This dealer grew a large stock of it, rechristened 
it and offered it to the public in 1902. In the twenty- 
four years since then it has made more friends than 
anyone else could make outside the movies. Which 
proves that popularity does sometimes follow real 
merit." 

Accurate information which will place definitely 
the history of most of our old varieties is lacking. As in 
all varieties the evidence available is related to show 
the most probable origin and the progress of the variety, 
In 1898, E. L. Coy of Washington County, New York, 
a veteran seed grower and expert on potato varieties, 
when visiting a cousin at Greenfield, Massachusetts, 
was served sweet corn at dinner. He was very much 
impressed by the quality of the corn and upon investiga- 
tion learned that it had come from the garden of J. G. 
Pickett. The variety had come to Mr. Pickett upon 
the death of an old gentleman " who had a fancy for 
furnishing his friends with some choice early corn long 
before they had thought of having any ripe enough for 
the table, — but he would never let any of them have 
any to plant." 

In the spring of 1900, Mr. Coy secured from Mr. 
Pickett all the seed he could spare (less than 2 quarts) 
and sent it to Mr. Burpee with this notation, " you now 
own the very sweetest and richest corn ever known." 
After 2 years' trial the career of Golden Bantam was 
launched. At first its progress was slow for it was a 
yellow corn and therefore had much adverse popular 
opinion to overcome. Henry A. Dreer wrote in 1906, 
" when one gets the sweet delicious taste, the color of 
the grains is forgotten." 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 78 days, 



78 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



6 days later than Golden Sunshine and 5 days earlier 
than Golden Giant. This has been for several years 
the most popular sweet corn for all purposes. The name 
has become so thoroughly impregnated in the minds of 
the growers and consumers that many of them will not 
accept anything else. Such faith has of course made an 
impression on those interested in breeding and selec- 
tion, so that continual work of this nature has gone ahead 
in order to increase the quality of the desirable char- 
acteristics and to limit the presence of inferior ones. 
It is evident, then, that Golden Bantam has assumed 
the position it now holds because of its rare quality and 
wide adaptability. The plants are about equal in height 
to Golden Giant, but somewhat more slender, while the 
stalks are more often streaked with red and not as 
heavily braced. The ears are shorter than Barden's 
Wonder Bantam, with kernels slightly more narrow. 
Undoubtedly more individual strains have been 
selected from Golden Bantam and given equally as 
many name variations, than any other sweet corn 
variety. This condition has brought about a great mass 
of Golden Bantam strains which, because of such factors 
as climate, location, and utility, have been selected 
and grown for market. Such recognized names as 
Extra Early Bantam, Golden Bantam Selected, Golden 
Bantam Improved, Golden Bantam Massachusetts 
Grown, Golden Bantam Mountain Grown, and Minne- 
sota 8-rowed Golden Bantam, are in themselves examples 
of the influence of season or section on the selection 
of that particular strain. Their favorable points are 
recognized, be it in relation to season or climatic 
adaptability, yet the differences are truly variations in 
strain and therefore are not given individual treatment 
in this study. The description that follows is meant 
to convey a word picture of the true type which for 
many years has meant so much to the professional 
and amateur gardener alike. 

Plant medium tall, 5—5 J 2 feet; stalks slender, moderately 
straight: nodes 8-9, partially covered and occasionally prominent; 
internodes streaked and blotched with red on exposed portions. 
Brace roots usually not present. Tillers variable in number. 
Leaves medium long and narrow, 28-30 x 3} 2- 3?4 inches; sheath 
equal to and occasionally shorter than internode. Tassel moder- 
ately short and moderately slender, 14—16 inches, occasionally colored 
at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect to 
slightly drooping, many present, short, simple and moderately well 
distributed; bracts green, striped with slight to moderate amount of 
red; anthers usually buff colored (deep colonial buff) although some 
strains also produce some that are reddish bronze (terra cotta); 
58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, often two ears per stalk with 
an additional nubbin occasionally present. Shank 3-5 inches 
long, slender, brittle. Husk leaves few, short and moderately 
light; husks medium in number, thin; inner layer of the inside husks 
adheres to kernels, not easily removed. Silk rather short and scanty, 
variable in color, easily removed. Husked ear medium long and 
slender, 6-7 x 1 ' _. -1 ■' , inches, nearly cylindrical with a very slight 
taper at tip end; base rounded and tip conical; rows 8, regular, 
straight, and uniformly spaced. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, rather large, broad, moderately 
thick and shallow; at dry stage amber yellow, medium size, .88 x 1.08 
x .38 cm. 1125 seeds per oz.); short, moderately broad ovate; crown 
distinctly rounded, semicircular; surface rough, finely wrinkled; 
set slightly loose on cob. 



Golden Bantam. 10- to 14-Rowed. Refs. 21, 279. Syn. 
Giant Golden Bantam, Improved Golden Bantam. 

To some, the small size of the ear has been one of 
the most desirable characters of Golden Bantam; to 
others, the smallness of ear has been most objectionable. 
Many attempts have been made by crossing or by selec- 
tion to increase both vigor of plant and size of ear of the 
variety. In 1922, the Everett B. Clark Seed Co., of 
Milford, Connecticut, now the Associated Seed Growers, 
Inc., introduced Golden Bantam 10- to 14-Rowed as 
a selection from the original Golden Bantam. This 
strain has been continued as a large Bantam particularly 
desirable for canners and market gardeners. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 78 days, 
the same as Golden Bantam, 6 days later than Golden 
Sunshine and 5 days earlier than Golden Giant. The 
plants are as a rule more stocky and inclined to produce 
more tillers than the regular Golden Bantam. The 
ears have from 10 to 14 rows instead of 8, and conse- 
quently are much plumper and less tapering. 

Plant moderately short, 4 ' -j-5 feet, stalks slender and moder- 
ately straight; nodes 8-9, exposed and prominent, internodes streaked 
with red on the exposed portions. Tillers many, nearly as tall as 
central stalk. Leaves moderately short and moderately narrow, 
26-28 x 3-3 1 2 inches; sheath distinctly shorter than internode. 
Tassel moderately short and heavy, 14-15 inches, colored at the 
base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets somewhat drooping, 
short, many and crowded; bracts green, moderately striped with 
red; anthers usually buff (deep colonial buff), occasionally a few 
reddish bronze (terra cotta); 60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, often two ears per stalk; 
shank short, 2-3 inches, moderately heavy and brittle. Husks 
moderately many, thick, rather tightly wrapped and medium long. 
Husked ear medium long and moderately plump, 6-7 x l?-g-lj£ 
inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering; base slightly enlarged 
and compressed; tip abruptly conical; rows 10-14, usually straight, 
occasionally irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, moderately wide and 
medium shallow; at dry stage dull orange yellow, medium size, 
slightly longer than wide, 1.05 x .95 x .35 cm. 1 1 24 seeds per oz.); 
triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface rather finely but 
shallowly wrinkled; rather loosely set on cob; occasionally tight. 

Golden Cory. Refs. 73, 321. Syn. Early Yellow Cory. 
This was offered by Chas. J. Lindholm, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, as new in 1922 and again in 1928. Since 
in both cases it was said to have come from a cross 
between Mammoth Cory and Golden Bantam, we assume 
that the original introduction was lost and that the 
later introduction represents a new line. This might 
possibly account for the 1922 stock having 14 to 16 
rows and that of 1928 from 10 to 12 rows. 

Plant moderately short, 4 '2-5 feet; stalks slender and some- 
what zigzag; nodes 8-10, slightly exposed but not very prominent. 
Tassel medium long, 15-18 inches, slender; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets horizontal, short and medium in number. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 

ears per plant. Shank short and slender. Husks few, rather short 

and loosely wrapped, easily removed. Husked ear medium long 

I and moderately plump, 7-8 x 1 : s -1"k inches, moderately tapering; 

I rows 12-14, straight, regular, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, rather narrow, medium depth and 

thickness; at dry stage dull amber yellow, small, short and narrow, 

.9 x .92 x .35 cm. (156 seeds per oz. 1; somewhat triangular; crown 

slightly rounded; surface abundantly but shallowly wrinkled; set 

I tightly on cob. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



79 



Golden Cream. Refs. 41, 45, 124, 141, 335, 344, 373, 
377, 525. Syns. California Golden Country 
Gentleman, Golden Bantam Shoe Peg, Golden 
Country Gentleman. Illus. 25, 80. 
When Country Gentleman was introduced in 1890 
its sponsors were loud in their praise of its nectar-like 
sweetness and its milky character. Perhaps this feature 
led C. C. Morse & Co. of San Francisco, to bestow 
the name Golden Cream on the new yellow corn which 
they purchased from the originator, Thomas Gould 
of Ventura. California. Mr. Gould had made a cross 
between Country Gentleman and Golden Bantam, 
naming his selection Golden Gentleman. Stock seed 
was purchased by Mr. Morse in 1908, and after selec- 
tions had been made, the variety was offered in 1911 
under the name of Morse's Golden Cream. Seed was 
sent East as early as 1910 for seed increase purposes and 
so Dreer, Thorburn, Childs, and others listed the new 
creation in 1911 and 1912. It was truly the cream 
of the best, and only the shortness of the ear prevented 
its being called the " golden twin " of true Country 
Gentleman. This same shortness of ear probably was 
the direct cause for its popularity being limited to the 
home gardener. 

Country Gentleman and Golden Bantam were 
crossed to produce Golden Cream. Fifteen years later 
(1926) Peter Henderson 8b Co. introduced Golden 
Country Gentleman, the result of a cross combining 
" all the sugary sweetness, tenderness and lusciousness 
of the original Country Gentleman, with the rich golden 
color now in such favor with lovers of sweet corn." 
Stocks of these two varieties, Golden Cream and Golden 
Country Gentleman, grown at Geneva have been found 
to be very nearly identical. 

Eighty-eight days were required to reach edible 
maturity at Geneva. This proved to be 10 days later 
than Golden Bantam and 2 days earlier than Bantam 
Evergreen. Golden Cream is a taller grower than 
Golden Bantam, and it possesses more leaves and a 
tassel that is distinctly more bushy. With the exception 
of Papago, the husks are more tightly wrapped than any 
yellow variety. The silk is likewise much more abundant 
and more uniformly red than that of any other yellow 
sweet corn. 

Plant moderately tall, 5} 2-6 feet, stalks slender, moderately 
straight: nodes 9-10, nearly covered, not prominent. Brace roots 
occasionally present on one node, slender, neither complete nor 
very useful. Tillers usually absent, decidedly shorter than central 
stalk. Leaves medium long and narrow, 28-30 x 2 } ->-3 'j inches; 
sheath equal to and longer than internode. Tassel moderately 
short and slender, 14-16 inches, not colored at the base; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets drooping, simple with basal ones com- 
pound, many present, short and crowded; bracts green, distinctly 
striped with dark red, anthers very numerous, reddish bronze, 
I terra cotta to vinaceous russet); 66-68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, very often two ears per stalk. 
Shank short, 2-3 inches, slender and brittle. Husk leaves very few 
present, short and light; husks moderately few, very often streaked 
with purple on exposed surface, tightly wrapped, not easily removed. 
Silk uniformly dark red, long and very abundant. Husked ear 
moderately short, moderately plump at butt end, 6-7 x l'j-l^ 
inches, distinctly tapering; kernels arranged irregularly, no rows 



present, exceedingly crowded; rounded at the base and very sharply 
conical at the tip; glumes very long and heavy. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, very deep and narrow, not 
uniform; at dry stage bright yellow, long, slender, peg-like or cuneate 
in shape; 1.1 x .70 x .33 cm. (208 seeds per oz. I; crown often dimple 
dented, angular; surface rough and rather finely and abundantly 
wrinkled; set moderately loose. 

Golden Crosby. Ref. 21. 

The name Golden Crosby was given to a composite 
of inbred strains produced by D. F. Jones at the Con- 
necticut State Agricultural Experiment Station. The 
first of the crossing was made in 1924. Several inbred 
strains of Crosby sweet corn were received from the 
Maine Agricultural Experiment Station. Three of these 
were crossed with inbred strains of Golden Bantam 
originally obtained from the Vick Seed Company of 
Rochester, New York. From these crosses several lines 
were grown and self-pollinated for two generations. 
The best of these lines having all yellow sweet seeds were 
mixed and allowed to interpollinate. After 2 years the 
resulting combination, selected toward the Crosby type 
with all yellow kernels, was called Golden Crosby. The 
first seed was sold in 1928 by the Associated Seed 
Growers of New Haven, Connecticut. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 75 days, 
in season with Whipple's Yellow, 3 days earlier than 
Golden Bantam and 3 days later than Golden Sunshine. 
The plants are slightly shorter than Golden Bantam with 
tillers more abundant and nearly equal to the central 
stalk. The husked ear is slightly longer with the apex 
more definitely tapering. The kernels in the milk 
stage are more narrow and shallow with more rows 
per ear than Golden Bantam. The compactness and 
uniformity in kernel type indicate its similarity to the 
Crosby type. 

Plant moderately short, 4 1 £-5 feet; stalks slender and moder- 
ately zigzag; nodes 7-8, exposed and prominent. Tillers moder- 
ately many, nearly as tall and often equal to central stalk. Leaves 
medium long and moderately narrow, 23-30 x 3-3 'j inches; sheath 
shorter than internode. Tassel medium long, 15-18 inches; termi- 
nal spike erect; lateral spikelets moderately drooping, variable in 
number, rather long and moderately scattered: bracts and anthers 
variable in color; 54-56 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank variable in length. Husks few, moderately 
short and rather tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and 
plump, 7-8 x 1 3 4-1 7 3 inches, partly cylindrical and moderately 
tapering; base distinctly rounded and compressed; tip sharply 
conical and usually exposed; rows 12, regular and straight, very 
crowded around the cob, uniform and attractive. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, moderately narrow and 
shallow; at dry stage light golden orange, small, short, narrow and 
moderately thick, .90 x .81 x .38 cm. (170 seeds per oz. >; distinctly 
triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface moderately 
fine wrinkled; set very tight on cob. 

Golden Dawn. Refs. 57. 182, 196, 238, 241, 348, 403, 
406, 411. Syn. Mammoth Golden Dawn. 
Golden Dawn preceded the introduction of Bantam 
Evergreen by 7 years. Henry A. Dreer of Philadel- 
phia secured the seed stock in 1906 from Henry C. 
Anthony of Newport, Rhode Island, a well-known market 
gardener who was also a corn seed grower of considerable 
repute. The exact origin of this strain possessed by 



80 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Mr. Anthony remains unknown, although it is said to 
have come from a cross between Golden Bantam and 
Stowell's Evergreen. 

Dreer called the variety Golden Dawn which was 
rather misleading, for the variety was not an early as 
the name Dawn might indicate. Dreer listed the 
variety continuously from 1906 to 1925. W. W. Rawson 
of Boston also listed a Golden Dawn in 1904, only 2 
years after the introduction of Golden Bantam by 
Burpee. 

Mammoth Golden Dawn, " a sort taken from the 
regular strain of Golden Dawn." was offered in 1920 
by the Fottler, Fiske, Rawson Co. of Boston. This was 
discovered as a sport in a field of Golden Dawn where it 
was conspicuous by its size of ear. In habit of growth the 
plant resembled its parent, but the larger ear (14 to 16 
rows') as illustrated appeared to be similar to ears of 
Golden Giant. The name does not appear after 1925. 

In 1919, Joseph Breck & Sons of Boston offered a 
Golden Dawn which has been continued up to the 
present and is quite popular in New England. Records 
which would indicate whether the Golden Dawn of 
Breck is the same as the old strain of Golden Dawn first 
noted in 1904 are not available. The information 
included in this account, however, is based on the 
variety as it exists today. 

Edible maturity was obtained at Geneva in 78 days, 
in season with Golden Bantam, 6 days later than Sun- 
shine, and 5 days earlier than Golden Giant. The 
plants are considerably coarser and more stout than 
those of Golden Bantam, the leaves are longer, and the 
tassels are distinctly longer and heavier. The ears are 
similar to Gold Bond, about the same length but slightly 
less plump. The kernels are much broader and more 
shallow than those of Gold Bond, while in the dry stage 
they are very tightly set and sparsely wrinkled. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5' o feet; stalks moderately slender and 
straight; nodes 9-10, exposed and prominent. Tillers many, 
slightly shorter and often as tall as central stalk. Leaves moderately 
long and broad, 30-32 x 3 3 4 -4'2 inches; sheath shorter than inter- 
node. Tassel distinctly long and heavy, 20-22 inches; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets horizontal, moderately long and many 
present; bracts light green sparsely striped with light red; anthers 
variable in color, mostly (terra cotta) ; 54—58 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Shank medium long, 3-5 inches, 
moderately heavy but brittle. Husks moderately few, short, 
heavy and tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately long and 
moderately plump, 8-9 x l?4-l"s inches, moderately tapering; base 
moderately compressed, occasionally somewhat open; tip conical 
and slightly exposed; rows 10-12, moderately straight, occasionally 
somewhat irregular at the base; usually crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at the milk stage yellow, large, moderately broad and 
thick; at dry stage dull amber yellow, medium size, slightly broader 
than long, 1.0 x 1.08 x .44 cm. 1 100 seeds per oz. |; short broad ovate, 
occasionally somewhat triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; 
surface very coarsely and sparsely wrinkled, often nearly smooth; 
set very tight on cob. 

Golden Early Market. Refs. 114, 206, 319, 335, 345, 

346, 347, 348. Syns. Extra Early Golden, Extra 

Early Yellow, Golden Hummer, Golden 60 Day. 

This variety originated as a chance cross of Golden 

Bantam with Early White Market in a field of that 



variety grown by Gill Bros. Seed Co. of Portland, 
Oregon. Some years previous to 1925, the year of its 
introduction by Gill Bros., officials of that company 
noticed the accidental cross. They realized the pos- 
sibilities of such a combination and saved seed from the 
plant. Selections were made and a strain developed 
which was outstanding in earliness, good flavor, and 
productiveness. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 68 days, 
4 days earlier than Golden Sunshine, 10 days earlier 
than Golden Bantam, and 6 days later than Spanish 
Gold. The plants are much coarser and more scraggly 
growing than any other yellow variety. The stalks are 
heavier than Golden Sunshine, are shorter and the nodes 
are exposed more prominently. The ear is about the 
same length but more abruptly conical at the tip than 
Golden Sunshine, while the kernels are broader and 
slightly larger. Golden Hummer, in the trials at Geneva, 
proved to be so similar to Golden Early Market that it 
was difficult to distinguish between them. Golden Hum- 
mer, however, produced ears slightly longer and more 
uniform in appearance than those of Golden Early 
Market, while the plants appeared to show more red 
streaking on the sheath and exposed internodes. The 
two were identical in season. 

Plant moderately short, 4 1 >~5 feet; stalks slender, moderately 
straight; nodes 7-8, exposed, prominent; internodes shaded dark 
red on exposed portions. Brace roots usually present and partially 
complete on one node. Tillers few, very often absent. Leaves 
short and moderately narrow, 24-26 x 3-3 • 1 4 inches; sheath distinctly 
shorter than internode. Tassel medium long and slender, 15-18 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, stiff, 
many present, short and crowded; bracts green, sparsely striped 
with moderately dark red; anthers variable in color; 52-55 days 
to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank short, heavy but brittle; Husk leaves few, 
distinctly short and light ; husks few, short, heavy, quite tightly 
wrapped. Husked ear moderately short and plump, 6-7 x 1 J-jj-2 
inches, somewhat cylindrical with a moderate taper; tip rounded 
to abruptly conical; rows 12-14, quite regular, straight, crowded 
around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, medium size, moderately deep, 
wide and thick; at dry stage dull yellow, fairly broad and long, 
1.0 x 1.0 x .37 cm. (128 seeds per oz. ); triangular; crown slightly 
rounded; surface rather sparsely and shallowly wrinkled, often 
distinctly irregularly crease-dented; set moderately loose on cob. 

Golden Gem. Refs. 232, 335, 345, 347, 348, 571. 
Syns. Early Golden Gem, Gold Nugget. Illus. 25. 
This variety is the result of the work during the 
last 10 years of Professor Yeager at the North Dakota 
Agricultural Experiment Station to produce an earlier 
yellow sweet corn. Sunshine at the time of its intro- 
duction was found by several hundred cooperators 
to be the earliest yellow sweet corn for North Dakota. 
Professor Yeager, however, continued his breeding work 
with a cross between Sunshine and Pickaninny which 
resulted in the production of another variety a week 
earlier than Sunshine. It was first sent out as Gold 
Nugget in 1927, but because of name duplication, it 
was rechristened Golden Gem in 1928 and seed given to 
seedsmen for trial. 




V\ 






GOLDEN CREAM 



(Natural size) 




WHIPPLE'S EARLY YELLOW 



(Natural size) 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



81 



At Geneva this variety came into bearing in 61 days, 
and was usually the earliest yellow variety, although 
Spanish Gold in some seasons equalled this time or was 
a day or so earlier. This is 1 1 days earlier than Golden 
Sunshine and 17 days earlier than Golden Bantam. 
The variety can only be considered as a home garden or 
early market sort, because the small size of the ear and 
stover render it uneconomical to produce. The plants 
of Golden Gem are much the shortest of any yellow 
variety, much more slender and shorter than those of 
Golden Bantam. The ears are often as long as those 
of Golden Bantam but are more slender and the plants 
are not as productive. Dry kernels are distinctly pale 
yellow as contrasted with the darker dull yellow of 
Spanish Gold or Golden Giant. 

Plant short, 3 1 j-4 feet; stalks very slender and straight; nodes 
6-7, covered, not prominent. Brace roots and tillers usually absent. 
Leaves very short and narrow, 20-22 x 2 3 .t-3 inches, distinctly 
colored at the margin; sheath longer than internode. Tassel very 
short and slender, 12-14 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spike- 
lets nearly erect, few, short, simple, and moderately crowded; 
bracts green, moderately striped with red; anthers buff color (deep 
colonial buff to chamois! ; 46^t8 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, usually one ear per stalk 
with an additional nubbin usually present. Shank very short and 
slender, 2-3 inches. Husks few, moderately thick, short, rather 
tightly wrapped but easily removed. Husked ear moderately short 
and slender, 6-7 x l^s-l'g inches, nearly cylindrical, slightly taper- 
ing; tip conical and usually exposed; rows 8-12, straight, regular and 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage moderately light yellow, quite wide and 
moderately shallow; at dry stage very pale yellow, medium size, 
moderately broad and short, .91 x 1.1 x .38 cm. (140 seeds per oz.); 
short broad oval in shape; crown distinctly rounded; surface quite 
finely and abundantly wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 

Golden Giant, De Lue's. Refs. 56, 72, 100, 124, 141, 
335, 344, 373, 466, 478, 488, 499, 506, 521, 525, 
562. Syns. Golden Giant, Golden Prize, Golden 
Wedding. 
Golden Giant has been very commonly used as a 
class name, particularly during the last 10 years when 
other varieties have been introduced very similar to 
it in size of ear and in season. Of all the varieties 
resulting from crosses of Golden Bantam and a white 
variety, this has proved to be one of the best so far 
established. The white parent was Howling Mob and 
the cross was made about 1906 by Dr. Frederick S. De 
Lue of Needham, Massachusetts. After 10 years selec- 
tion it was exhibited in 1916 before the Vegetable Com- 
mittee of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society who 
for the first time in the history of the Society awarded 
to a variety of sweet corn its much-sought-for silver 
medal. The award was made for the best new vegetable 
introduced in 1916; and certainly the wide use of the 
variety today shows that the committee were justified 
in their decision. Joseph Breck 6s Co. introduced the 
variety with a full page display in their catalog of 1917. 
Eighty-three days were required for this variety to 
reach edible maturity at Geneva. This was 5 days later 
than Golden Bantam and 7 days earlier than Bantam 
Evergreen and Sunnybrook. Plants are about equal 
in height to Golden Bantam, less inclined to tiller, and 



show red on sheaths more abundantly. The husked 
ears are thicker and larger than 10- to 14-rowed Bantam 
with kernels larger and more coarse. In the dry stage, 
the kernels are set more tightly on the cob than are 
those of Golden Bantam and are decidedly less wrinkled. 
Golden Giant is used chiefly as a market garden and 
truck gardening variety and by some commercial 
canneries. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5'^ feet; stalks moderately slender, 
straight; nodes 9-10, usually covered, not prominent; internodes 
streaked with red on exposed portions. Brace roots present on 
one node, slender, occasionally useful, whorl not always complete. 
Tillers moderately few present. Leaves moderately short and 
moderately narrow, 25-26 x 3-3 ' j inches, sheath equal to internode 
and occasionally longer, very often prominently streaked with red. 
Tassel medium long and slender, 16-18 inches, terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets both horizontal and slightly drooping, many 
present, crowded, compound; bracts green, rather heavily striped 
with red; anthers bronze red (vinaceous russet) and purplish red 
(van dyke red); 60-63 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank quite variable, 3-4 inches, moderately 
heavy but brittle. Husks many, short, rather heavy, rather 
difficult to remove. Silk abundant, moderately long, easily removed 
from cob and quite uniformly red in color. Husked ear medium 
long and plump, 7-8 x \%— 2 inches; slightly tapering, base rounded, 
slightly enlarged and compressed; tip abruptly conical, and often 
partly exposed; rows 12-16, usually regular, straight, occasionally 
irregular at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, medium size and rather shallow. 
At dry stage amber yellow, medium size, short and thick, 1.0 x 1.0 x 
.41 cm. (108 seeds per oz.); nearly square in shape; crown slightly 
rounded; surface sparsely and very shallowly wrinkled; set tightly 
on cob. 

Golden Honey. Refs. 224, 523. 

Golden Honey is of the past for the name no longer 
appears in present-day catalogs. There would seem to 
be no better name that could be used to describe the 
combination of color and of quality that can be found 
upon eating the sweet yellow ears of good corn. The 
name was first used in 1906 by the Templin Co. of 
Calla, Ohio, and was given to a variety which from 
pictures and descriptions was only a reappearance of 
Golden Sweet. In 1906, Templin said, " Has been 
known in this section of Ohio among a few families for 
about 35 years." J. Reynolds Lawrence, Eden Trial 
Grounds, North Middleboro, Massachusetts, who enjoyed 
quite a reputation as an experimenter, wrote in 1906 as 
follows, " I cannot say too much for Golden Honey. 
It is a sweet corn and no mistake, and not only sweet 
but of most excellent flavor." The name was not carried 
by Templin after 1919. 

Gregory offered a Golden Honey from 1911 to 1928. 
This was apparently a 12 -rowed sort and, although we 
have never seen it growing in trial, early descriptions 
would place it as a close companion to Vick's Golden 
Nugget. 

Golden Leader. Ref. 321. 

Minnesota has the reputation for growing good 
sweet corn. There is evidence of this in the large 
acreage grown by market gardeners and by canners 
in that state. The varieties used are quite varied and 
among them are several not grown elsewhere. A 



82 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



few of these good varieties have been bred or selected 
by C. J. Lindholm, a Minneapolis gardener and seedsman. 

Mr. Lindholm crossed Quincy Market, which is 
even more popular on the Twin City markets than in 
its home territory, with Golden Bantam. This cross 
was made in 1915 and after 7 years work a hybrid strain 
was offered to growers as Golden Leader. The parent 
varieties have ears that are quite individual, so that the 
combination resulted in a rather attractive new yellow 
type. 

Eighty-two days were required for this variety to 
reach edible maturity at Geneva. This was identical 
in season to that of Golden Rod, 4 days later than 
Golden Bantam, and 8 days earlier than Sunnybrook. 
The plants are shorter and more inclined to zigzag than 
Golden Rod, leaves much shorter and more narrow, 
and tassels shorter and more erect. The ears are more 
tightly wrapped with husks, while the husked ear is 
more plump, although of equal length. The dry kernels 
are smaller, much longer in proportion to the width, and 
triangular in shape instead of broad ovate. In many 
respects it resembles Golden Giant, but stalks are more 
uniformly slender and kernels at milk stage distinctly 
more narrow. It is used in the Middle West to a con- 
siderable extent as a market and home garden variety, 
and at Geneva has proved to be a very uniform and 
attractive sort. 

Plant moderately tall, 5 J 2-6 feet; stalks moderately slender 
and slightly zigzag; nodes 9-10, slightly exposed, occasionally 
prominent ; internodes quite heavily shaded with red on the exposed 
portions. Brace roots present on one node, moderately useful 
and complete. Tillers moderately many, usually as tall as central 
stalk. Leaves short and narrow, 23-25 x 2 1 -j-3 , 2 inches, sheath 
slightly shorter than internode. Tassel moderately short, 15-16 
inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets nearly erect, short, 
many present and moderately crowded; bracts green, moderately 
striped with red; anthers dark reddish brown (vinaceous red to 
van dyke red); 65-66 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd to the 5th nodes, usually one ear per stalk 
with an additional nubbin usually present. Shank short, 2-3 
inches, moderately heavy and brittle. Husks moderately long, 
heavy, tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and plump, 
7-8 x 1 3 4~2 inches, moderately tapering; base slightly enlarged and 
compressed; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 12—16, regular 
and straight, occasionally somewhat irregular at the base, crowded 
around the cob. 

Kernels at the milk stage light yellow, rather narrow and shal- 
low; at the dry stage light amber yellow, small, slightly longer than 
broad, .94 x .85 x .35 cm. (128 seeds per oz.); triangular; crown 
slightly rounded; surface moderately fine, shallow and abundantly 
wrinkled, occasionally rather smooth and devoid of much wrinkling; 
set tightly on cob. 

Golden Nugget. Ref. 542. Ann. of Hort. 1892. 171. 

Golden Nugget was introduced in 1892 by James 
Vick's Sons, Rochester, New York, and was received 
with considerable enthusiasm. This new variety and 
new type, a 12 -rowed yellow sweet corn, differed from 
the 8-rowed Golden Nugget of Gregory offered in 1893. 
Until the early twenties the variety remained a distinct 
and popular sort, but present strains are quite similar to 
Bantam Evergreen. 

Edible ears were produced about 1 week later than 
Golden Bantam. The plants of Golden Nugget were 



about 1 foot taller and more inclined to tiller than 
Bantam. The husked ears were about the same length, 
but were more plump and contained 10 to 12 rows 
instead of 8. Many reports indicate that Golden Nugget 
was also a much more productive sort. Since the true 
type no longer exists, definite information relative to 
this factor must remain untold. 

Plant moderately short, 4'_i-5 feet; stalks slender. Tillers 
many, nearly as tall as central stalk. Leaves short and narrow, 
22-24 x 2 :5 [— 3 inches, sheath equal to and occasionally shorter than 
internode. Tassel medium long and moderately slender, 14-16 
inches, usually colored at the base; terminal spike moderately 
erect, lateral spikelets erect to slightly drooping. 

Ears borne 3rd to 5th nodes, often two ears per stalk and an 
additional nubbin present. Shank medium long and slender, 3-4 
inches long. Husks medium in number, thin, short, moderately 
tight wrapped and rather easily removed. Husked ear moderately 
short and moderately plump, 6-7 x l^-l ?4 inches; moderately 
tapering, base compressed, tip sharply conical; rows 10-12, moder- 
ately straight, slightly irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, medium size, rather shallow; 
at dry stage amber yellow, broad as long; ovate, crown slightly 
rounded, surface moderately wrinkled; set moderately tight on cob. 

Golden Orange. Ref. 57. 

This variety offered by Thomas W. Emerson Co. of 
Boston in 1914 and by Joseph Breck & Sons in 1919 
was developed by George S. Steele, a progressive grower 
farming at Hudson, New Hampshire. 

At Geneva 72 days were required to reach edible 
maturity, in season with Golden Sunshine, 4 days later 
than Golden Early Market, and 6 days later than Golden 
Dawn. The plants and ears most resemble those of 
Golden Dawn (Breck), the former being slightly taller 
and inclined to produce tillers considerably shorter. 
The husked ears of Golden Orange are slightly shorter 
and plumper, whereas the kernels are inclined to be 
deeper orange yellow in color. In the dry stage, the 
kernels are more triangular in shape, whereas those 
of Golden Dawn are short and broad ovate. The 
variety is used primarily as a home and market garden 
sort in the New England states where it helps to fill 
the gap between the extreme earlies and the regular 
Golden Bantam. 

Plant moderately tall, 5 '2-6 feet; stalks medium heavy, 
slightly zigzag; nodes 8-9, usually exposed and prominent. Brace 
roots absent. Tillers moderately many, usually half as tall as 
central stalk. Leaves medium long and moderately broad, 28-30 x 
3 l £—4 inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassel medium long 
and slender, 16-18 inches; terminal spike erect: lateral spikelets 
horizontal, medium long, moderately many, and crowded; bracts 
pale green moderately striped with red; anthers buff ^deep colonial 
buff to chamois); 54-56 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and very often two ears 
per stalk; shank moderately long and slender, 4-5 inches. Husks 
moderately many, medium long, rather loosely wrapped and easily 
removed. Husked ear medium long and plump, 7-8 x 1 3 ±-2 inches, 
partly cylindrical and slightly tapering; base rounded and com- 
pressed; tip abruptly tapering; rows 12-14, straight, regular and 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage deep yellow, soon assuming an orange 
yellow tint, large, broad and rather thick: at dry stage nearly 
broad as long, 1.0 x 1.05 x .43 cm. (92 seeds per oz. I; roughly tri- 
angular; crown slightly rounded; surface rather abundantly and 
deeply wrinkled; set tightly on cob. 






DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



83 



Golden Rod. Refs. 30, 261, 525, 562. 

Introduced in 1911 at a time when the yellow- 
grained varieties were slowly but steadily gaining in 
favor. Golden Rod was decidedly of high quality and a 
meritable acquisition to the Bantam family. The cross 
between the parent varieties Golden Bantam and 
Stowell's Evergreen was made in 1906 at the Baldwin, 
Long Island, trial grounds of Peter Henderson & Co. of 
New York. This variety has the same parentage as 
Bantam Evergreen, but as shall be noted when the two 
varieties are compared, the recombination of characters 
resulted in two radically different types. For many 
years Golden Rod, Golden Cream, Bantam Evergreen, 
and Golden Bantam made up the " Big Four " of yellow 
varieties. 

Eighty-two days were required for this variety to 
reach edible maturity at Geneva. This was practically 
the same season as Golden Giant, 4 days later than 
Golden Bantam, and 8 days earlier than Bantam 
Evergreen. The plants of this variety most resemble 
those of Carpenter's Giant Golden Sweet, whereas the 
husked ears are much like those of Sunnybrook, being 
slightly shorter and usually averaging two more rows. 
The variety has been advanced as a mid-season variety 
of the large Bantam type. It is used primarily as a 
market garden and home garden sort where the demand 
is for a larger ear. 

Plant tall, 6 ] _>-7 feet; stalks moderately heavy and straight; 
nodes 9-10, exposed, prominent. Brace roots present and com- 
plete on one node. Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk. 
Leaves long and moderately broad, 32-34 x 3 1 r-4 inches; sheath 
distinctly shorter than internode. Tassel long and very slender, 
22-24 inches; terminal spike slightly drooping; lateral spikelets 
drooping and somewhat spreading, long, many present, crowded; 
bracts pale green, very sparsely striped with pale red; anthers buff 
color (chamois to deep colonial buff); 60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, very often two ears per stalk. 
Shank quite variable in length, rather tough. Husks moderately 
many, long and rather loosely wrapped. Husked ear medium long 
and moderately plump, 7-8 x l 5 s-l ;? 4 inches, moderately tapering, 
base enlarged; tip conical and usually exposed; rows 10-14, occa- 
sionally paired and irregular at the base, usually crowded around 
the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light orange yellow, moderately wide 
and shallow; at dry stage bright orange yellow, moderately large, 
usually broader than long, 1.04 x 1.17 x .39 cm. 1,104 seeds per oz.); 
short, very broad ovate in shape; crown distinctly rounded; sur- 
face moderately fine and abundantly wrinkled although somewhat 
variable in this respect; set moderately tight on cob. 

Golden Sunrise. Ref. 317. 

In the collection of newer varieties Golden Sunrise 
is outstanding in the large-eared group of varieties. 
H. S. Mills, a former member of the staff of Cornell 
College of Agriculture, is responsible for its origin. 
Mr. Mills supervised the corn breeding work at the 
Long Island Vegetable Research Farm, Riverhead, 
New York, and in 1925 produced this promising sort by 
field crossing Golden Bantam and Long Island Beauty. 
Selection for type was made in 1926 and continued 
until 1928. In 1929, the stock seed was moved by 
permission from Cornell University to Bristol, Pennsyl- 
vania, at which time Mr. Mills was employed by the 
D. Landreth Seed Co. Selections continued and in 



1931, when the type was well fixed, the D. Landreth 
Seed Company first offered it as Golden Sunrise. 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 81 days, 
3 days later than Golden Bantam and 9 days earlier 
than Bantam Evergreen. The plants of this variety 
are the most vigorous of all yellow varieties of major 
importance, being taller than Bantam Evergreen or 
Whipple's Yellow and as stout as Bantam Evergreen, 
with foliage more abundant and somewhat lighter 
green. The variety is of too recent origin to be ade- 
quately judged. Limited trials, however, have indicated 
its possibilities as a canning and market garden variety 
of more than ordinary quality. 

Plant tall, 7} 2-8 feet; stalks straight and moderately heavy; 
nodes 10-12, usually somewhat exposed, moderately prominent. 
Brace roots present and complete on one node, moderately heavy 
and useful. Tillers usually absent, occasionally a very few but 
always shorter than the central stalk. Leaves long and broad, 
32-34 x 4-4 ' 2 inches; sheath equal to and often slightly shorter than 
the internode. Tassel long and heavy, 20—22 inches; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets drooping, many present, moderately 
long, and rather crowded; bracts light green, moderately striped 
with dark red; anthers buff color (deep colonial buff); 64-65 days 
to anthesis. 

Ears borne at the 4th and 5th nodes, one ear per stalk with 
an additional nubbin present. Shank variable, 2-5 inches, slender. 
Husk leaves many, short and light; husks many and thick, rather 
tightly wrapped, medium long. Husked ear moderately long and 
plump, 8-10 x l?4-2 inches, moderately to decidedly tapering; 
base enlarged and usually compressed; tip conical; rows 12-14, 
usually straight but often somewhat irregular at the base. 

Kernels at milk stage bright to orange yellow, medium in 
size and moderately deep; at dry stage dull yellow, medium width 
and thickness, moderately long, 1.1 x .85 x .37 cm. (148 seeds per 
oz.); triangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface heavily 
and rather deeply wrinkled; set loosely on cob. 

Golden Sweet. Refs. 17, 61, 73, 87, 89, 91, 93, 121, 
214, 217, 220, 223, 241, 298, 308, 312, 348, 350, 
397, 406, 412, 429, 503, 507, 508, 512, 513, 536, 
537. Syns. Early Yellow New England, Golden, 
Golden Early Yellow, Golden Sugar, Golden 
Yellow, Yellow. 
The date when this name became associated with 
the sub-variety mentioned by Salisbury in 1848 as " a 
new variety made by crossing the Sweet with the Early 
Canada " is as unknown as the originator and intro- 
ducer. The idea of its origin was recognized by Burr, 
1863, who said, " apparently a hybrid between Common 
Yellow or Canada Flint and Darling's Early." 

From the records of J. J. H. Gregory & Son of 
Marblehead, Massachusetts, there is evidence that a 
Golden Sweet was sent out in 1865. This was a very 
early bright golden yellow sort. The catalog of 1885 
gives this short but apt description: " Golden Sweet: 
The only cross ever made between the sweet and field 
varieties; flavor, peculiarly rich." A few years after 
the original introduction the seed stock was lost, but in 
1875 a new source was found. The demand for a 
golden sweet was very limited and about 1887 the name 
had disappeared from their catalog. 

In 1893 a new name appears in Gregory's list, 
" Golden Nugget." " We find this to be the variety 
catalogued years ago, under the name of Golden Sweet. 



84 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Though not new, it has some good characteristics, 
peculiar to itself. We refer to its bright golden color, 
and a rich flavor suggesting a cross between the field and 
sweet corn, which is very agreeable to most persons." 
The Golden Sweet was also listed in 1868 by Hovey 
fit Company of Boston, who described it as a " hybrid 
between common yellow and Darling's Early; tender, 
sweet but less sugary than most sweet varieties." It 
was described the same year by Curtis 8s Cobb. Today 
it does seem strange that this yellow type now repre- 
sented by Golden Bantam, the acknowledged leader 
of all sweet corn, was ignored in favor of white varieties 
now considered inferior in quality. 

Plant moderately short, 4 } >-5 feet, stalks slender. Ears 
borne low on plant; husked ears moderately short and moderately 
slender, 6-8 x 1 J 2 _ 1 3 4 inches, cylindrical or slightly tapering. Rows 
8-10, regular and straight. Kernels at dry stage " semi-trans- 
parent yellow," large, broad as long, 121 seeds per oz.; crown rounded, 
nearly semi-circular; surface moderately wrinkled. 

Jewell Bantam. Ref. 146. 

Comstock, Ferre 8s Co., of Wethersfield, Connecti- 
cut, purchased, in 1922, a small quantity of seed of a 
hybrid corn from a local farmer. After 3 years trial and 
reselection they introduced it as Jewell Bantam. The 
cross had been accidental and was between Golden 
Bantam and Evergreen, giving ears which were of good 
golden color but markedly different from the Bantam 
in size and shape. It has been offered since 1927 by 
R. B. Dunning 8s Co. of Bangor, Maine. 

At Geneva edible maturity was obtained in 77 days, 
approximately the same as Golden Bantam, 5 days 
later than Golden Sunshine, and 5 days earlier than 
Barden's Wonder Bantam. The plants are practically 
identical to those of Barden's Wonder Bantam although 
less inclined to tiller. The husked ears are slightly 
shorter than Barden's and plumper, containing 10 to 
14 rows instead of 8 to 10. The kernels in the milk 
stage are narrower but about the same depth; in the 
dry stage they are usually less wrinkled and distinctly 
tighter set on the cob. The variety is used for those 
whose trade demands a fairly large sized ear early 
in the season. Its use therefore is largely confined 
to home and market gardeners. Its increased vigor 
over that of regular Golden Bantam renders it as a 
possibility in those areas where the latter variety does 
not perform satisfactorily. 

Plant moderately tall, 5 ! _<-6 feet; stalks moderately slender 
and straight; nodes 9-10, exposed and prominent. Brace roots 
slender, moderately useful, whorl complete on one node. Tillers 
moderately many. Leaves medium long and moderately broad, 
28-30 x 3J4-3 s .i inches; sheath shorter than and occasionally equal to 
internodes. Tassel medium long and slender, 16-18 inches; terminal 
spike erect; lateral spikelets quite drooping, moderately long and 
abundant; bracts green, sparsely striped with red. Anthers light 
yellow and buff (pinard yellow to chamois); 68-70 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, usually one ear per stalk 
with an additional nubbin present. Shank moderately long, 4-6 
inches, heavy and brittle. Husks moderately many, medium long 
and rather tightly wrapped. Husked ear medium long and moder- 
ately plump, 7-8 x 1%-I :i , inches, partly cylindrical, rather sharply 
tapering near tip; base slightly enlarged and tip conical, occasionally 
capped: rows 10-14, regular, straight and crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light golden yellow, medium width (some- 



what wider on the 10-rowed specimens), and rather shallow; at 
dry stage broader than long, .92 x 1.1 x .38 cm. (120 seeds per oz.); 
somewhat triangular in shape; crown rounded; surface moderately 
wrinkled, often quite finely so, rather shallow; tightly set on cob. 

Kingscrost. Refs. 210, 498. Syn. Double Crossed 
Golden. 

Northrup, King 8s Co. offered this new hybrid- 
inbred as Double Crossed Golden in 1930, but in 1933 
renamed it Kingscrost. It was featured by R. L. Gould 
8s Co., St. Paul, Minnesota, and by Francis C. Stokes 8& 
Co. in 1933 as a new departure in yellow sweet corn 
with uniformity in growth and in maturity of the ears. 

This is a sweet corn that is doubly new. For 
nearly a hundred years we have had new varieties 
introduced that were the products coming from crosses 
between two well-established sorts. For themselves 
many of these parent stocks did not represent pure lines. 
If they could have been dissected for all of the many 
characters possessed by a corn plant, there would have 
been found not consistency for these characters, but its 
very opposite, variability. Therefore, when two parents 
having variation for the separate characters, were crossed, 
the hybrid or progeny would again tend to be even more 
variable. 

Nowadays, in order to produce a new stock, the 
plant breeder may first self-fertilize parent strains 
and after several generations produce inbred or pure 
lines. The crossing of two inbred strains produces in 
the first generation a hybrid-inbred with plants that are 
uniform in their many characters. This program is 
now being carried out by many corn breeders and in the 
future many new varieties so produced may be offered. 
The inbred lines are controlled by the originator, neces- 
sitating the renewal of the seed stock each year from 
the original parent lines. 

Edible maturity was obtained at Geneva in 70 days, 
8 days earlier than Golden Bantam and 9 days later than 
Golden Gem. The plants were more like Golden Gem 
than Golden Bantam, consistently producing more 
tillers than either variety and stalks more slender than 
the latter. The husked ears were inclined to be more 
noticeably paired than those of Golden Bantam, but 
otherwise the ears were very similar. Its uniformity 
both in plant and ear characteristics render it a distinct 
contribution to the home and market gardener. 

Plant short, 4-4' ■• feet; stalks slender, slightly zigzag; nodes 
6-7, usually exposed, prominent. Brace roots absent. Tillers 
distinctly many, nearly as tall as central stalk. Leaves short and 
narrow, 18-22 x 2%- 3 inches, uniformly red on the margin; sheath 
shorter than internode. Tassel short and slender, 12-15 inches, 
occasionally red at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
nearly erect, short, stiff, few present and scattered; bracts green, 
moderately striped with red; anthers uniformly dull reddish bronze 
(terra cotta); 51-52 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present, small ears often borne on the tillers. 
Shank medium long and slender, 4-5 inches. Husks medium in 
number and length, rather tightly wrapped but easily removed. 
Husked ear medium long and slender, 7-8 x l' 1 .-l" s inches, partly 
cylindrical and slightly tapering; base slightly expanded, tip conical 
and exposed: rows 8, somewhat distinctly paired, moderately 
straight, slightly irregular at the base, not crowded around cob; 
furrows deep but rather narrow. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



85 



Kernels at milk stage bright orange yellow, rather small, 
shallow and medium width; at dry stage, dull orange yellow, broader 
than long, .84 x 1.0 x .35 cm. 1,104 seeds per oz.); short broad ovate; 
crown rounded: surface abundantly and rather finely wrinkled; 
set moderately tight on cob. 

Nuetta. Refs. 242, 335, 556, 557. Syn. Indian Sweet. 

This is one of the few varieties of sweet corn that 
can be traced back to an Indian source. Oscar H. Will 
& Co., Bismarck, North Dakota, were the introducers, 
having secured seed from a Mandan Indian at Elbo- 
woods, in 1912. It was first called Indian Sweet Corn. 
In 1919 Will named many of his other introductions 
from Indian sources after some tribal name of the 
Indians of the St. Berthold Reservation. To carry out 
this policy Indian Sweet was renamed Nuetta, the 
Indian word for Mandan. Although Nuetta can be 
traced back to native Indian cultivation, it differs from 
other types that have been described. The kernel in 
the dry state is dark red in color, but when harvested 
for boiling it is a rather light yellow. It is also unlike 
any other in that whereas the dry kernels are a dark 
red color the glumes and cob are white. It thus differs 
from the variety known as Number 20, page 302, in 
Will's book Corn Among the Indians, which had a 
white cob with a red ring about the edge of the pith 
(glumes i. It also differs in this same respect from the 
near-white varieties having reddish seed in the dry stage, 
such as Narragansett, Marblehead, Dighton, and 
Aristocrat. 

Seventy -seven days were required to produce edible 
ears at Geneva. This was 6 days earlier than Golden 
Giant, about the same season as Golden Bantam, and 
8 days later than Dighton. Nuetta produces plants 
that are about 1 foot shorter than those of Golden 
Bantam and slightly taller than those of Dighton. 
It has a greater tendency to tiller than the former, is 
more prominently and more uniformly shaded with red, 
and has decidedly deeper purplish red anthers. The 
husked ears are slightly longer and kernels in the milk 
stage are much lighter yellow than Golden Bantam, 
but in the dry stage they assume a much more intense 
reddish bronze than those of Golden Age. Portions of 
the kernels, however, retain a yellowish cast common 
to that of most yellow varieties at a comparable stage. 
The variety has been subsequently developed for the 
Northern Plains area where its earliness and resistance 
to somewhat adverse weather conditions has given it a 
place of limited importance. It is not widely known 
nor is it believed to be cataloged by anyone but the 
introducer. 

Plant moderately short, 4-4 '^ feet; stalks slender, moderately 
straight; nodes 7-8, usually covered, not prominent; internodes 
shaded with light red at the base of nodes and exposed surfaces. 
Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk. Brace roots 
absent, plant easily blown over. Leaves short and narrow, 24—26 x 
2 3 4-3 inches, colored red at the margin; sheath equal to and occasion- 
ally shorter than internode. Tassel moderately short and slender, 
14—15 inches, usually colored at the base; terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets nearly erect, medium in number, short, simple; 
bracts variable in red stripping, ringed at the base; anthers very 
uniformly deep red i bordeaux); 58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally two 



ears per stalk, husks moderately few, short, tightly wrapped and 
difficult to remove. Husked ear medium long and moderately 
slender, 7-8 x l 1 , 1\ inches, moderately tapering; base slightly 
enlarged and compressed; tip conical and exposed; rows 8, some- 
what irregular, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage deep cream (maize yellow), large, very 
broad and moderately deep; at dry stage deep brownish red (hayes 
russet) with portions of the crown much lighter (mars yellow); 
wider than long, 1.01 x 1.27 x .39 cm. 1 96 seeds per oz. ); short oval 
in shape; crown rounded, usually somewhat crease-dented with 
one-half of the surface usually higher than the other; surface sparsely 
and coarsely wrinkled; set moderately tight on red cob. 

Papago. Refs. 198, 228, 375, 549. Syn. Papago Sweet. 
Illus. 25. 

The catalog descriptions of Papago corn often 
allude to the variety as the prehistoric sweet corn of the 
Indians of Arizona and New Mexico. It is possible 
that among some of the very early dwellers of the arid 
Southwest there did exist a definite variety of sweet corn, 
but such is not to be found today. This particular 
variety, Papago, instead of coming directly as a kind 
grown by the Indians, resulted from the intensive 
selection program of G. F. Freeman, plant breeder at the 
Arizona Experiment Station. 

Prof. Freeman, realizing the impossibility of secur- 
ing really high grade green sweet corn for table use in 
Arizona until it could be grown in the state, was attracted 
to a few ears of a true southwestern Indian or Squaw 
corn which contained a number of wrinkled sweet 
grains. The discovery was made while visiting the 
Papago Indian villages in the desert valleys of southern 
Arizona between the Baboquivari and Quizotoa Moun- 
tains. Originally, the seed came from two ear types 
varying in size, depth of kernel and susceptibility to 
worm injury and molds. The few grains secured were 
planted in 1910, the same year they were found, and 
produced 2 ears of the large type and 20 of the smaller. 
Plant breeding methods were followed to bring the 
size of the ear and the grain up to standard and in 1915 
the improved strain was so far superior to the unaccli- 
mated eastern sorts that its introduction as Papago 
Sweet was well justified. 

At Geneva 117 days were required for this variety 
to reach edible maturity. This was by far the latest 
maturing sweet corn, either yellow or white, in any of 
the Geneva trials. This was 27 days later than Bantam 
Evergreen and Sunnybrook, the two late season varieties 
usually grown for market in New York. The plants were 
slightly taller than Mills' Golden Sunrise, much more 
leafy and with a more bushy tassel. The husks are more 
tightly wrapped than any other sweet corn, thereby 
rendering it nearly immune to corn ear worm infestation. 
The kernels are decidedly thicker and more shallow 
than any other sweet variety. It has no importance 
in this section of the country, although in the semi-arid 
regions of the Southwest it has been reported to yield 
well and possess considerable drought resistance. 

Plant very tall, 8-8 '2 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
straight; nodes 12-14, covered, not prominent; internodes shaded 
with solid red on exposed portions. Brace roots present and com- 
plete on one and two nodes, useful. Tillers many present, nearly as 
I tall as central stalk. Leaves long and moderately narrow, 36-38 x 



86 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



2 3 4 -3 ) ■_> inches: midrib quite broad, deeply furrowed and prominent ; 
sheath distinctly longer than internode. Tassel long and slender, 
18-20 inches, not colored at the base; terminal spike erect; lateral 
spikelets nearly erect to slightly drooping, many, moderately long, 
rather crowded and usually simple; bracts pale green striped with 
dark green and occasionally ringed with red at the base; anthers 
uniformly yellow pinard yellow : 85-90 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 7th and 8th nodes, usually one ear per stalk 
with one or two nubbins usually present. Shank short, 2-3 inches, 
slender but moderately tough. Husk leaves occasionally few present, 
very short and light. Silk abundant, medium long and red in 
color, fairly easy to remove. Husked ear moderately long and 
moderately slender, 8-9 x 1 1 .>1 3 4 inches, nearly cylindrical with 
slight taper near tip; base rounded and somewhat tapering; rows 
16-18, regular, straight, distinctly crowded around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage pale yellow, small, medium depth but 
narrow and thick; at dry stage almost lemon yellow, narrow, short 
and thick, .82 x .74 x .38 cm. (225 seeds per oz. ) ; distinctly triangular; 
crown slightly rounded; surface crease-dented, usually quite smooth 
except for an abundance of very minute wrinkling of the seed coat; 
set rather firmly, but not crowded. 

Red Cob Golden Bantam. Refs. 56, 112. Syn. 
Briggs' Red Cob Bantam. 
The variety of sweet corn first recorded and culti- 
vated by the early New England farmers had one very 
undesirable quality: that of possessing a red cob which 
might have stained the table linens. With this in the 
ancestral background we can understand, how, in 1914, 
a Mr. Briggs of Newton, Massachusetts, could find an 
ear of Golden Bantam with a red cob and then could not 
resist the urge to save it and attempt to develop some- 
thing new. Joseph Breck & Sons, first listed it in 1917 
as a rather early variety of extreme sweetness and 
tenderness. Grey, Childs, and Stumpp & Walter 
offered it in 1919. The edible ears were very similar 
to ears of Golden Bantam, but in the dry stage could 
be differentiated by the presence of a red cob and 
kernels with a crimson hue. 

Spanish Gold. Refs. 115, 118, 119, 540. 

The variety resulted from a program of crossing 
sweet corn started in 1924 at the Connecticut Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station at New Haven. One 
parent, characterized by a dark green sturdy plant 
bearing short well-filled ears with 12 to 16 rows of 
bright corneous kernels, came from the Pyrenees 
Mountains of Spain. That ancestor, a flint, grew near 
the sky on sunny slopes where spring comes late and 
winter comes close to summer. It was called " Cin- 
quantino " after the Spanish word for 50th on which 
day it was reputed to ripen. 

This variety, in all probability, is the same as that 
reported in the United States Department of Agriculture 
Annual Report for 1854, as follows: 

"Forty Day Maize (Mais Quarantain), a dwarf 
variety from the south of Spain, reputed once to have 
ripened high up in the Alps in forty days after planting. 
The object in introducing this grain in the United States 
was on account of its quick growth, early maturity and 
sweet flavor in the green state, as well as the delicacy 
of the bread made from its meal. Besides, it appears 
to be well adapted to the high latitudes and elevated 
valleys in many parts of the country, where most of 
the other varieties of corn will not thrive, and with a 
chance of a successful result in crossing it with the 



larger sorts, to which it might impart in a degree, its 
quality of early ripening if not its taste." 

To obtain that earliness and vigor, the amber 
Spanish corn Cinquantino was crossed with Crosby. 
Golden Bantam, Whipple's Yellow, Golden Giant, and 
Black Mexican. The seed of the hybrids having all 
yellow, sugary kernels were mixed and grown in one 
field in 1928 and allowed to interpollinate naturally. 
The process of selecting the earliest plants producing one 
good sized ear was continued for 3 years. " The Latin- 
Yankee union proved, like so many exotic mixtures, to 
foster a genius. The progeny matured remarkably 
early and was good to look upon and delicious to eat." 
The name Spanish Gold was chosen previous to its 
introduction in 1932 by F. H. Woodruff & Sons. 

Edible ears were obtained at Geneva in 62 days. 
10 days earlier than Golden Sunshine and 1 day later 
than Golden Gem. Plants of this variety were quite 
individual, possessing stalks much more zigzag and 
nodes more prominent than those of any other sort. 
Considerably more red was present on the sheath and 
margins of the leaves as well as on the exposed portions 
of the internode. The husked ear is more plump, 
contains more rows, but is about equal in length to 
Golden Gem. The variety is of too recent origin to 
have established a definite utility among the various 
groups of growers. Its extreme earliness and increased 
size of ear in comparison to other varieties in its class, 
however, qualifies it for a thorough test. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 ' 2 feet, stalks slender and distinctly 
zigzag: nodes 7-8, exposed, prominent, internodes shaded with red 
over exposed portions. Brace roots present and complete on one 
node, very slender. Tillers few to none, often terminate with a 
small ear. Leaves medium short and narrow, 24-26 x 2 3 4 -3 inches, 
colored at the margin; sheath much shorter than internode. Tassel 
moderately long and slender, 18-20 inches, terminal spike erect; 
lateral spikelets moderately erect to horizontal, few present, moder- 
ately short and scattered; bracts green, distinctly striped with dark 
red, also ringed at the base with the same color; anthers mixed; 
48-50 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Husks few, quite heavy, 
moderately long and tightly wrapped. Husked ear moderately 
short and moderately plump, 6—7 x 1 3 4 -l " % inches, slightly tapering; 
tip abruptly conical; rows 12, regular, straight, crowded around the 
cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, small, thick, and fairly deep; 
at dry stage bright yellow, short and narrow, .93 x .90 x .42 cm. 
1 136 seeds per oz. ; usually triangular; crown slightly rounded; 
surface rather finely and abundantly wrinkled; set moderately 
tight on cob. 

Sunnybrook. Refs. 83, 348. 

The twin sister variety to Burpee's Delicious ( white) 
came from the garden of Herbert Hoffman of Merchant - 
ville, New Jersey. In the fall of 1916, while stripping 
off some seed ears in a patch of Golden Bantam, Dr. 
Hoffman found an ear which showed all the character- 
istics of that variety but which had a few white kernels 
on it. The white kernels were separated from the 
yellow and planted separately the next year. Both 
came perfectly true and, while the ears grew consider- 
ably larger than those of Bantam, the twin sports had 
the same meaty, luscious sweet flavor of the parent. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



87 



The introduction of the yellow selection as Sunnybrook 
in 1924 was brought about by Burpee. 

Edible ears were produced at Geneva in 90 days, 
in season with Bantam Evergreen, 1 week later than 
Golden Giant, and 2 days later than Golden Cream. 
Only one other yellow variety, a minor one, Papago, 
required longer to reach edible maturity. Plants are 
shorter than those of Bantam Evergreen, although the 
tassel was distinctly long and slender in proportion to 
those of the taller varieties. The husked ear was equal 
in length to Bantam Evergreen but much more tapering. 
The ears most resemble those of Buttercup, but pos- 
sessed more rows and more narrow kernels. The 
variety is used primarily as a market and home garden 
sort, coming into production at a time when the earlier, 
smaller growing yellow varieties have completed their 
normal season. 

Plant moderately tall, 5 } £-6 feet; stalks moderately slender and 
straight; nodes 9—10, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, 
moderately heavy with whorl complete on one node, vestigial on 
the second node. Tillers few. Leaves long and moderately broad, 
30-34 x 3 y r~ t inches; sheath longer than but occasionally equal to 
the internode. Tassel distinctly long and moderately slender, 
20-22 inches; terminal spike moderately drooping; lateral spikelets 
drooping, moderately long, many present and crowded; bracts 
pale green, sparsely striped with red; anthers buff color (deep 
colonial buff to chamois I ; 66-68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 5th and 6th nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin present. Shank moderately long, 4-6 inches, 
heavy but brittle. Husk leaves many, short and light; husks 
moderately many, long, heavy and wrapped rather loosely. Husked 
ear moderately long and moderately plump, 8—9 x 1 5 8 — 1?4 inches, 
moderately tapering, base slightly enlarged, compressed; tip conical, 
slightly exposed; rows 10-12, moderately straight, occasionally 
somewhat irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, moderately narrow and medium 
depth; at dry stage bright amber yellow, moderately large, long 
and medium width, 1.18 x 1.03 x .39 cm. (104 seeds per oz.); tri- 
angular in shape; crown very slightly rounded; surface quite deeply 
and abundantly wrinkled and creased; set loosely on cob. 

Sunshine. Refs. 194, 209, 335, 345, 346, 347, 348, 478, 
559, 570, 571. Syns. Early Sunshine, Gold 
Standard No. 5, Golden Sunshine. Illus. 25. 

At the North Dakota College of Agriculture, A. F. 
Yeager, in 1919, saw the need for his region of a variety 
earlier than Golden Bantam and with a larger ear. 
Based on the records of a previous trial three large- 
eared, extra early white sorts were chosen and planted 
in alternate rows with Golden Bantam. All of the 
plants in the rows of white corn were detasseled, thus 
insuring a cross with Golden Bantam. Long before 
harvest it became evident that Gill's Early Market was 
preferable as the other parent. This is a 12 -rowed white 
variety of fair quality selected out of Portland Market by 
Gill Bros, of Portland, Oregon. Portland Market 
originally was selected from Mammoth White Cory. 

For 6 years Professor Yeager carried along the 
progeny of this cross using the modern methods of the 
corn breeder to isolate the line which seemed to have the 
most desirable characteristics. The 1923 season lots 
were reduced to seven and the next year one of the seven 
lots was chosen as superior to all others. Some of the 
seed secured was sent out in a limited way for trial 



in 1925, but the first wide-spread testing came in 1926. 
Since then, because of its earliness and size of ear, 
Sunshine has been considered one of the leading yellow 
varieties. 

At Geneva Sunshine produced edible ears in 72 
days. This was 6 days earlier than Golden Bantam 
and 10 days later than Spanish Gold and Golden Gem. 
Plants were slightly taller than those of Golden Bantam 
and decidedly more bushy and leafy. Stalks were more 
zigzag and nodes more inclined to be exposed and promi- 
nent. The ears averaged an inch longer, were more 
plump, and possessed 10 to 12 rows instead of 8. Kernels 
at the edible stage were somewhat lighter yellow in 
color, more narrow, and deeper, while the dry seeds were 
slightly less finely wrinkled. 

This variety met with success in many sections of 
the country. It possesses that invaluable characteristic 
of fulfilling requirements as a desirable market garden- 
ing variety because of its extreme earliness and good 
quality, as a possible major canning type because of its 
quality and size of ear, and as an enviable home garden 
variety since it can be used satisfactorily for a diversity 
of purposes. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5 ' 2 feet, stalk moderately slender and 
straight; nodes 7-9, usually exposed and prominent; exposed 
portions usually streaked and blotched with red. Brace roots 
present on one node, whorl complete, moderately slender and useful. 
Tillers few present. Leaves moderately short and moderately 
narrow. 26—28 x 3-3 > 2 inches; sheath usually shorter than internode. 
Tassel medium long and heavy, 14—16 inches, not colored at the 
base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets erect to slightly droop- 
ing, many present, crowded, basal ones usually compound; bracts 
green, slightly striped with light red; anthers buff colored (deep 
colonial buff to chamois) moderately uniform; 54—56 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one ear per stalk with an 
additional nubbin usually present. Shank variable, 2-6 inches, 
moderately slender and brittle. Husk leaves many, moderately 
stiff and distinctly darker green than husk. Husks many, heavy, 
wrapped rather loosely, easy to remove. Silk scanty, medium long 
and easily removed. Husked ear medium long and moderately 
plump, 7-8 x 1 3 4~2 inches, partly cylindrical, moderately tapering; 
base rounded and tip conical; somewhat exposed; rows 10—12, 
regular, straight and crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow; medium size, moderately 
broad and medium deep; dry stage light yellow, medium size, .94 x 
1.07 x .39 cm. (128 seeds per oz.); somewhat triangular in shape; 
crown slightly rounded; surface slightly rough, extremely wrinkled; 
set tightly on cob. 

Sweet Orange, Seymour's. Refs. 81, 225, 335, 348, 
373, 520, 525, 546. Syns. Burpee's Sweet Orange, 
Large Golden Bantam. Illus. 25. 
This was the second yellow sweet corn which W. 
Atlee Burpee offered or introduced. The first trial at the 
Fordhook Farms during the 1905 season gave results 
so favorable that Mr. Burpee contracted with the 
originator, H. J. Seymour, a member of the Oneida 
Community at Kenwood, New York, for his entire 
supply of seed to be produced during the 1906 season. 
Sweet Orange was first introduced in 1907 as a second 
early, to serve as the main crop yellow corn. Burpee 
stressed its quality, even pronouncing it superior to 
Golden Bantam in sweetness and tenderness (if one 
could believe such to be possible). 



88 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Edible cars were produced at Geneva in 75 days, 
3 days earlier than Golden Bantam, 5 days earlier than 
Carpenter's Giant Golden Sweet, and 3 days later than 
Golden Sunshine. Sweet Orange is individual in several 
characters, one of which is in respect to the orange- 
colored kernels at milk stage. Although quite sweet, 
unfavorable criticism has been voiced due to the shal- 
lowness of the kernels and the presence of long glumes. 
The variety most resembles Carpenter's Giant Golden 
Sweet. The plants are about a foot shorter and more 
slender. The ears tend to be more slender, containing 

2 to 4 less rows with kernels that are much more intense 
orange color at the milk stage. 

Plant medium height, 5-5 ' 2 feet; stalks moderately slender 
and straight; ncdes 9-10, covered, not prominent. Brace roots 
usually absent. Tillers many, slightly shorter than central stalk. 
Leaves medium long and moderately broad, 28-30 x 3'j-4 inches; 
sheath longer than internode. Tassel medium long and heavy, 
15-18 inches, somewhat feathery; terminal spike erect; lateral 
spikelets slightly drooping, long, compound and evenly distributed; 
bracts green rather sparsely striped with red; anthers pale reddish 
bronze (terra cotta); 63 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk; shank short and slender, 2-3 inches. Husk leaves 
few, short and light. Husks many, medium long and loosely 
wrapped, easily removed. Husked ear medium long and moderately 
slender, 7-8 x l'j-l'i inches, moderately tapering; base enlarged 
and compressed; tip conical and slightly exposed, occasionally 
capped; rows 10-14, moderately straight, often slightly spiral, 
and irregular at the base, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage orange yellow, small, narrow and shallow; 
at dry stage deep orange, short and thick, .85 x .8 x .38 cm. (132 
seeds per oz. ; triangular in shape; crown rounded; surface finely 
and abundantly wrinkled; set slightly loose on cob. 

Whipple's Early Yellow. Refs. 104, 247, 335, 345, 
346, 347, 348, 478, 480, 525. Syns. Golden 
Delicious, Whipple's Yellow. Illus. 81. 

To Silas Whipple of Norwich, Connecticut, all good 
lovers of sweet corn are truly indebted, for the strains 
that came as a result of his careful work are two of the 
most popular varieties grown. Joseph Harris Co. of 
Coldwater, New York, introduced Whipple's Early White 
in 1919, and first offered Whipple's Early Yellow in 
1921. Mr. Whipple had always grown and selected 
his own seed corn and when, after many years work, he 
perfected Whipple's Early White, he proceeded to make 
this good white corn yellow. Rows of the white were 
planted alternately with Golden Bantam and the 
tassels of the white pulled out before the pollen was shed. 
The ears produced on the Whipple's Early White plants 
were all yellow and some that were exhibited took first 
prize at the county fair. Seven years were needed to 
eliminate all the white characters from this corn. Mr. 
Whipple writes, " I crossed it but once because it would 
inherit the small ear and short kernel of the bantam in 
a double portion." 

At Geneva edible ears were produced in 75 days, 

3 days earlier than Golden Bantam and 3 days later 
than Golden Sunshine. The plants of this variety are 
the most vigorous of all early yellow sorts; about 1 
foot shorter than Bantam Evergreen, with stalks more 
slender and less inclined to tiller. Ears are borne lower 
on the stalk but are of equal size. In the dry stage, 



kernels are decidedly more tightly set and, although 
abundantly wrinkled, are not crease-dented as in Bantam 
Evergreen. Whipple's Yellow has maintained for several 
years a position of importance among truck crop pro- 
ducers. Its earliness and abundant yield of large 
yellow ears have rendered it most acceptable to the 
market gardener. 

Plant moderately tall, 6-6' •_> feet, moderately slender, slightly 
zigzag; nodes 9-10, exposed, prominent; internodes occasionally 
streaked with red on exposed portions. Brace roots present on 
one node, moderately slender, useful and whorl complete. Tillers 
few present. Leaves moderately long and moderately broad, 
30-32 x 3';>— i inches; sheath shorter than internode. Tassel mod- 
erately long and heavy, 18-20 inches; terminal spike nearly erect, 
lateral spikelets both erect and moderately drooping, many present, 
crowded and usually simple although the basal ones often compound ; 
bracts green, moderately striped with red ; anthers buff colored (deep 
colonial buff to chamois) ; 58-60 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and very often two ears 
per stalk; shank variable, 3-8 inches long, usually quite heavy but 
brittle. Husks moderately many, heavy, rather short, wrapped 
rather tightly but fairly easy to remove. Silk red in color, moder- 
ately abundant and long, easily removed from cob. Husked ear 
large, moderately long and plump, 8-9 x l 3 4 -2 inches, moderately 
cylindrical, slightly tapering near the tip; base rounded and com- 
pressed; tip broadly conical to nearly rounded; rows 12-16, usually 
regular and straight, occasionally slightly twisted; crowded around 
the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage light yellow, moderately large, medium 
width, deep, at dry stage pale yellow, longer than broad, 1.04 x .93 
x .40 cm. (140 seeds per oz.); triangular in shape; crown nearly 
straight, very rough; surface deeply and quite heavily wrinkled; 
set moderately tight on cob. 

Wonder Bantam. Barden's. Refs. 48, 192, 288, 335, 
345, 432, 478. Syn. New Wonder Bantam. 
C. S. Clark & Sons of Wakeman, Ohio, are one of 

the largest and oldest establishments growing seed corn 
in the United States. C. A. Bar den of that firm joined 
the search for a larger Bantam and as one possible 
source crossed Golden Bantam in 1919 with Early 
Wonder, an 8-rowed white variety. Four years later 
the new hybrid Bantam sweet corn was introduced. 
The continued success of the larger and more vigorous 
hybrid has made it a contender for the honor of being 
the most desirable yellow variety introduced since the 
original Golden Bantam was brought out by Burpee. 
Edible ears were produced in 82 days, 4 days 
later than Golden Bantam and about the same season 
as Golden Rod. As a whole the variety is a much 
more vigorous grower than Golden Bantam, will produce 
a longer ear higher up on the stalk, maintain a greater 
yield, and in practically the same number of days. In 
these qualities is derived the basis for its increasing 
popularity among canners and market gardeners. It 
most resembles Buttercup, differing from that variety 
in possessing ears that are slightly more tapering and 
exposed, and plants that are heavier, darker green, and 
more inclined to stool. The tillers also bear a larger 
proportion of marketable ears than does Buttercup. 

Plant moderately tall, 5'2-6 feet; stalks moderately slender 
and straight: nodes 9-10, slightly exposed, occasionally prominent; 
brace roots few present, slender, not very useful. Tillers many, 
nearly as tall as central stalk. Leaves medium long and moder- 
ately narrow, 28-30 x 3';>-3 3 4 inches; sheath equal to and often 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



89 



shorter than internode, often streaked with red at the base. Tassel 
medium long and slender, 16-18 inches, occasionally colored at the 
base; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets drooping, moderately 
many, medium long, compound at the base; bracts green, moderately 
striped with red; anthers buff chamois 1 ; 60—62 days to anthesis. 
Ears borne at 4th and 5th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, tiller often bearing a small one in addition. Shank 
rather long and heavy. Husked ear moderately long and moder- 



ately slender, 8-9 x 1 ' _. 1 ■"■ „ inches, partly cylindrical and moderately 
tapering; tip conical, slightly exposed; rows 8-10, usually regular, 
8-rowed specimens occasionally paired. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, broad, but rather thin and 
medium shallow; at dry stage deep yellow, medium size, .98 x 1.1 x 
.40 cm. (116 seeds per oz.); short, broad ovate, often somewhat 
triangular; crown rounded; surface rather finely wrinkled, often 
very shallowly pitted over the entire surface; loosely set on the cob. 



OTHER FORMS OF MAIZE USED AS SWEET CORN 



The varieties described in the preceding sections as 
white-kerneled and yellow-kerneled sweet corns are 
those which truly are classified in the species Zea Mays 
rugosa (sweet corn). It was stated in Chapter I that 
the original channel by means of which the white farmer 
became acquainted with corn was the American Indian. 
There is evidence in early writings (399, 553) that sweet 
corn as such was not the most common among corn types 
used by the Indians; and that dent, flint, and flour 
types were used in greater quantity by them as a source 
of food. It was natural, therefore, that when corn 
was first used by the white man that certain of these 
early Indian corns were commonly grown and used 
in the manner most preferred by the whites, i.e., as 
boiling or as roasting ears. 

For many years these corn varieties really made up 
the majority of the acreage planted to " sweet corn," 
but as new varieties with wrinkled seed were developed 
the dent, flint, and flour varieties were planted less and 
less. Today they are seldom planted on farms or in 
the gardens in New York State. Adams Early, the 
most popular of these sorts, represented not only a 
single variety, but also came to designate the whole 
group of corn varieties (Adams group) listed by seed 
companies in the North as garden field varieties and by 
seed companies in the South as garden corn (not sugar), 
sweet corns, or corn for roasting. 

No attempt has been made to describe all varieties 
which are listed as dent, flint, or flour corns and which 
are grown for either boiling or roasting ears. These 
varieties for the most part are found listed in catalogs 
coming from the South. The most important of these 
varieties or at least one variety to represent each of the 
various types has been described. It is to be noted that 
since these varieties are those most prominently listed 
in the Southern catalogs, they are probably the ones 
best suited for that section, growing vigorously, pro- 
ducing a large number of ears per acre, and showing 
considerable resistance to the corn ear worm. 

WHITE-KERNELED VARIETIES 

Adams Early. Refs. 14, 22, 40, 73, 74, 87, 89, 90, 91, 
93, 95,' 96, 120, 126, 200, 214, 238, 240, 241, 272, 
335, 345, 354, 361, 367, 397, 404, 405, 406, 411, 
451, 465, 468, 503, 511, 514, 525, 546, 569. Syns. 
Adams, Adams Early Improved, Adams Early 
White, Adams XX Early, Extra Early Adams 
White, Ideal, Ideal Early, Ideal Early Adams, 
Ideal Extra Early, New Ideal. Illus. 25, 90. 
Adams Early is described in the paper by Salisbury, 

1848, as a variety obtained from a Mr. Walker of the | 



District of Columbia. From the very beginning of its 
period of usefulness there has been two undisputed 
characteristics which continued this variety in use in 
all parts of the country. These can be summed up in the 
phrase " its merits are earliness and productiveness." Of 
all the names used for Adams corn, there are four which 
have generally existed and which have continued in use, 
each representing a slightly different selection and dif- 
fering in vigor, size of ear and plant, and in time of 
maturity. Adams Early, Extra Early Adams (syns. 
Burlington, Early Burlington), Extra Early Dwarf, 
Adams, and Large Adams are the four names. Of 
these, the first two were the earliest in use while the 
latter two are of more recent origin and are those most 
commonly found today. Burr wrote, "' Adams Early 
White: In its general appearance, the ear is not unlike 
some descriptions of Southern or Western field corn. 
In quality it cannot be considered equal to some of the 
shrivelled-kerneled, sweet descriptions, but will prove 
acceptable to those to whom the peculiar sugary character 
of these may be objectionable." 

Edible ears of Adams Early were obtained at 
Geneva in 82 days, 5 days later than Extra Early Dwarf 
Adams, 12 days later than Extra Early Adams, and 8 
days earlier than Large Adams. Although the kernels 
of these varieties are much the same, certain plant 
characters serve to distinguish them. In plant height 
Adams Early is intermediate to Extra Early Dwarf 
Adams and Extra Early Adams. The tassels of Adams 
Early are much longer, are more delicate, and contain 
more laterals than Extra Early Adams. The ears are 
1 : o to 2 inches longer and usually have two less rows, 
although this is not always consistent. Extra Early 
Dwarf Adams, the smallest in the group, has tassels 
which are short, very coarse and possess few, short, stiff 
laterals and in this respect is most like Extra Early 
Adams. 

Although these varieties are not true sweet corns, 
they possess fair quality when harvested at the correct 
stage of maturity. The hardness of the seeds enable 
them to germinate under more adverse soil moisture 
conditions, while the extreme tightness of the wrapped 
husks at the apex of the ear limit the ear worm damage 
to a minimum. These factors have made this variety 
particularly adaptable to southern growers, who find 
it difficult and usually impossible to grow the true sweet 
corn successfully. 

Plant medium tall, 5'j-6 feet; stalks moderately heavy and 
straight; nodes 10—12, covered, not prominent; brace roots present, 
whorl complete on one and occasionally two nodes, useful. Tillers 
entirely absent. Leaves medium long and moderately narrow, 



90 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



28-30 x 3-3}4 inches; sheath longer than internode. Tassel moder- 
ately long and heavy, 18-20 inches: terminal spike erect: lateral 
spikelets nearly erect, medium in number, medium long, stiff and 
moderately crowded; bracts green, very slightly striped with pale 
red, occasionally ringed at the base; anthers usually buff (chamois); 
60-62 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 4th to the 6th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk, very often several auxiliary ears attached to the same 
node. Shank short and heavy, 2-4 inches. Husk leaves rudi- 
mentary or entirely lacking. Husks many, thin, exceedingly well 
and tightly wrapped about the ear, difficult to remove, kernels 
often bearing husk impressions due to tight wrapping. Husked 
ear moderately short and plump, 6-7 x 2-2 ! 4 inches, distinctly and 
quite uniformly tapering; base compressed: tip abruptly conical 
to rounded: rows 12-14, regular, straight at the base but usually 
somewhat spiral at the tip, occasionally lost at the apex, exceedingly 
crowded both around the cob and in the rows. 

Kernels at milk stage white, large, moderately wide, shallow 
and rather thick: at dry stage, crown starchy white, remainder 
flinty, broader than long, 1.07 x 1.13 x .42 cm. 188 seeds per oz. ; 
short rectangular, almost square in shape; crown rounded; surface 
smooth, crease-dented; set very tightly on cob. 

The following varieties are similar in type to Adams 
Early, and may be discussed under this variety. The 
remarks concerning each are largely based on observa- 
tions at Geneva. Blands Extra Early (345, 522) pos- 
sessed typical Adams Early ears, but produced them 
on much more slender stalks. Baltimore or Extra 
Early Baltimore (227, 403, 518) was practically identical 
to Adams Early. Early Morn (521) likewise was so 
nearly like Adams Early as to present no practical 
separation. Delicious Cream ( 5 1 9 1 was reported to 
have resulted from a cross involving Adams Early and 
a sweet corn. No direct comparison has been made 
in our trials. Sixty-five Day White Cob (46) also 
proved to be practically identical to Adams Early, 
maturing at the same time, and producing plants and 
ears cf similar character. Bol Early (48) is the most 
divergent of the group, being a slightly less vigorous 
grower and producing a more bushy and branching 
tassel and kernels which, in the dry state, are definitely 
thicker and much less inclined to dent. 

Burlington Hybrid. Refs. 91, 125, 207, 208, 227, 275, 
290, 312, 313, 328, 403, 512. Syns. Early Burling- 
ton Hybrid, Landreth Early Market. 

Burlington Hybrid was one of the most highly 
publicized varieties of the entire non-sweet group. It 
originated in Burlington County, New Jersey, as the 
result of a cross involving Extra Early Adams and Early 
Mammoth. Although grown and apparently safe- 
guarded by a few market gardeners for a few years near 
its place of origin, it was finally introduced to the general 
public by Johnson and Stokes in the spring of 1889. 

At Geneva 88 days were required to reach edible 
maturity. This was 6 days later than Adams Early 
and 2 days earlier than Large Adams. The plants of 
Burlington Hybrid are the same height as those of 
Adams Early, but more slender, more leafy, and have 
longer tassels. The husked ears are slightly longer and 
decidedly more slender, while the kernels are slightly 
larger with a smooth, flinty surface. 

Plant medium tall, 5-5j^ feet; stalks slender and straight; 
nodes 9-10, covered, not prominent. Brace roots usually present. 



rather heavy and useful. Tillers absent. Leaves moderately 
short and medium narrow, 26—28 x 3}£-4j^ inches: sheath longer 
than internode. Tassel moderately short and slender, 15-16 inches; 
terminal spike erect: lateral spikelets nearly erect, medium in number 
and length, rather crowded: bracts green, slightly striped with red; 
anthers yellow i pinard yellow ; 63-65 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at the 3rd and 4th nodes, one and occasionally 
two ears per stalk. Husks many, rather heavy and tightly wrapped. 
Husk leaves few, short, and light. Husked ear medium long and 
moderately slender, 7-8 x l'o-l^s inches; slightly tapering; tip 
abruptly conical; rows 10-12, regular, crowded around cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white: medium width and thin; at dry 
stage dull amber white, broader than long, .89 x 1.07 x .39 cm. 108 
seeds per oz.); short oval; crown rounded; surface smooth; set on 
cob tightly. 

Although not grown at Geneva, reports indicate that 
in general appearance Buck Mountain or Burlington 
Market (238, 293, 373, 403, 406) was much like Burling- 
ton Hybrid. Fifty Day (521) was in type much like 
Burlington Hybrid, but produced a longer ear somewhat 
earlier in season. 

Extra Early Beverly. Refs. 313, 405, 515. Syns. 
Beverly, Earliest Table, Early Beverly, First 
Early Table. 

Extra Early Beverly was a half-sugar variety 
introduced about 1898 by D. Landreth and Sons, 
Philadelphia. The reports from early trials of this 
variety were very favorable. Rane (405) calls it "the 
only extra early 10 to 12 rowed variety of good quality." 
Taft ( 595 i in 1899 noted its " delicious flavor." Landreth 
continues to list the variety and they have maintained 
the stock as "a flinty grained variety which can be 
planted early in cold, wet ground." 

Seventy-eight days were required to produce ears of 
edible maturity at Geneva, which was 4 days earlier 
than Adams Early. 

Plant medium tall, S-S 1 ^ feet; stalks moderately slender and 
slightly zigzag; tillers very few to none. Tassel medium long, 
16-18 inches, lateral spikelets moderately many, drooping, simple 
and rather crowded. Ears borne at 3rd and 4th nodes, one and 
occasionally two ears per stalk. Husked ears medium long and 
moderately slender, 7-8 x l'i-lfs inches, partly cylindrical, 
slightly tapering: rows 12, regular, some inclined to be noticeably 
paired. Kernels at milk stage white, narrow, rather shallow and 
plump; at dry stage pale amber white, small, wider than long; 
surface smooth-flint type; set tightly on white cob. 

First Early Neck (40, 241) was a smaller grower, 
but produced ears very much like Beverly. 

French Market. Ref. 494. Syn. Improved French 
Market. 
Information concerning the origin and introduc- 
tion of this variety has not been found. The earliest 
catalog reference available indicates that it was featured 
by J. Steckler Seed Company of New Orleans. Louisiana, 
as early as 1910. It is used as a home and truck garden 
variety in the vicinity of New Orleans. 

Ninety-two days were required for this variety to 
produce edible ears at Geneva. This was 2 days later 
than Large Adams, 10 days later than White Australian, 
and 6 days earlier than Stowell's Evergreen. The 
plants are 2 to 2 1 £ feet taller than those of Large Adams, 
. have longer and broader leaves, and a tassel that has 




ADAMS EARLY 



(Natural size) 




WHITE AUSTRALIAN 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



91 



more laterals which are decidedly more crowded. The 
ears are borne higher, on longer more pendant shanks 
than those of Large Adams. The husked ears are 
longer, more plump, and much less tapering with 2 to 4 
more rows. The kernels in the dry stage are consider- 
ably longer in proportion to the width than those of 
Large Adams and are borne on a red instead of a white 
cob. It is one of the lesser grown sorts of the class, but 
when harvested at the correct stage becomes a fair 
substitute for the true sweet corn. 

Plant very tall. 9-10 feet; stalks heavy and straight; nodes 
15-16: covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, heavy, whorl 
complete on 2 nodes, useful on one. Tillers absent. Leaves long 
and moderately broad, 35-36 x 4—5 inches; sheath longer than 
internode. Tassel moderately long, 18-20 inches; terminal spike 
erect; lateral spikelets horizontal, many present, long, and very 
crowded; bracts green, moderately striped with red; anthers buff 
(deep colonial buff to chamois); 74-76 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 8th and 9th nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk; shank variable, weak, extending well away from stalk. 
Husk leaves very few to none, distinctly short and light. Husks 
many, thick, short, tightly wrapped and difficult to remove. Silk 
abundant, long and red. Husked ear long and plump, 9-10 x 2-2 '.i 
inches, partly cylindrical and slightly tapering; rows 16-20, regular, 
straight, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium width and depth, thin; 
at dry stage starchy white, particularly the crown, much longer 
than wide, 1.3 x .87 x .37 cm. (88 seeds per oz.); nearly triangular; 
crown straight; surface crease-dented, and very slightly rough at the 
point of stylar attachment; set tightly on red cob. 

Hickory King. Ref. 89. Illus. 25. 

Ears of Hickory King reached edible maturity in 
110 days and represent the largest seeded white dent 
variety grown at Geneva. It is grown to some extent 
in the southern states as a source of roasting ears. 

Plant tall, 7 1 ^-8 feet; stalks heavy and straight; 14—16 nodes, 
covered, close together; tillers absent. Brace roots present and 
complete on 2 nodes. Leaves long and broad, tassel moderately 
long; lateral spikelets many, rather long, horizontal. Ears borne 
at 8th and 9th nodes, one ear per plant. Husked ears medium long 
and moderately slender, 7-8 x 1 J 2 — 1 J 8 inches; kernels very wide, 
thin and deep; dent surface, set tightly on small white cob. 

Large Adams. Refs. 7, 254, 403, 517. Syns. Adams 
Dreadnaught, Early Large Adams, Large Early 
White Adams, Second Early Adams, Dreadnaught 
Ideal. 
To meet the requirements of a greater spread in 
season of edible maturity, larger strains of the Early 
Adams were developed. The specific time or place 
concerning the introduction of the first selection (larger 
and later) from Adams Early is unknown. Large 
Adams has plant and ear characters which differ notice- 
ably from those of Adams Early and the two stocks are 
therefore described separately. 

Ninety days were required for ears to reach edible 
maturity at Geneva. This was 4 days earlier than 
Truckers Favorite, 8 days later than Adams Early, 
and 8 days earlier than Stowell's Evergreen. The 
plants are 2 to 2] •_> feet taller than Adams Early and 
heavier. The ears and shanks are much longer, the 
latter often being pendant. The kernels have converg- 
ing crowns, whereas those of Adams Early are rounded 



and in the dry stage are considerably longer in proportion 
to the width. 

As with Adams Early, this variety is used extensively 
by southern growers instead of the true sweet corn 
varieties. Its large and practically ear worm impervious, 
tightly wrapped ears render it useful to those areas that 
ship to the early northern markets. 

Plant tall, 7-8 feet; stalks straight and moderately heavy, 
nodes 12-14, covered to very slightly exposed, not prominent. 
Brace roots occasionally present, rather heavy, whorl not complete, 
not very useful. Tillers entirely absent. Leaves moderately long 
and medium width, 32-34 x 3'_>-4'2 inches; sheath equal to and 
often longer than internode. Tassel medium long, 16-18 inches, 
rather coarse and heavy; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
nearly erect, medium long, simple, medium in number, not very 
crowded; bracts and anthers variable in color; 66-68 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 6th and 7th nodes, often two ears per stalk, one 
usually a nubbin. Shank long and heavy, 6-8 inches, often dis- 
tinctly pendant. Husk leaves few, very short and light. Husks 
many, short, coarse and heavy, tightly wrapped and difficult to 
remove. Husked ear moderately long and moderately plump, 
8-9 x lJg-2 inches, decidedly tapering; base enlarged and com- 
pressed; tip conical and slightly exposed; rows 16-18, straight, 
occasionally lost near apex, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, narrow, deep and thick, crown 
somewhat converging, with point of stylar attachment extended and 
prominent; at dry stage starchy white at the crown, the remainder 
flinty, considerably longer than wide, medium thickness, 1.13 x 
.94 x 42 cm. (88 seeds per oz.); rectangular; crown nearly straight; 
surface crease-dented, otherwise smooth; set tightly on cob. 

In this group the varieties Paducah Market (572) 
and Gentry Early Market (515, 561) may be included. 
The former is 1 ] 2 to 2 feet taller than Large Adams and 
possesses a more bushy tassel. The ears are of equal 
length but have 4 to 6 less rows of kernels. Gentry 
Early Market was a large-eared sort of the Adams type 
coming after Early Adams. It was featured by T. W. 
Woods and Sons of Richmond, Virginia. 

Mexican June. Refs. 221, 453. 

The earliest date of introduction that has been found 
indicates that J. J. H. Gregory listed Mexican June as one 
of his novelties in 1896. Although no information is 
given concerning its origin, Chris Reuter, a seedsman of 
New Orleans, Louisiana, mentioned in 1913 " The 
genuine Mexican June corn is only grown in one part 
of Mexico." Its use as green corn is confined to the 
southern states, particularly Texas and Louisiana. 
It has also been used by Dr. P. C. Mangelsdorf of the 
Texas Experiment Station in developing a vigorous ear 
worm-resistant sweet corn variety. His efforts culmi- 
nated in the production of Honey June, a variety which 
resulted from a cross between Mexican June and Country 
Gentleman. 

Edible ears of Mexican June were produced at 
Geneva in 104 days, 2 weeks later than Large Adams 
and 10 days later than Truckers Favorite. The plants 
are equal in height to those of Truckers Favorite and 
slightly more slender and straighter, while the anthers 
are definitely buff instead of reddish bronze. The 
husked ears are about equal in length but are slightly 
more plump, likewise the kernels in the dry stage are 
much thinner, more rounded, and more nearly smooth. 



92 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant tall, TMr&Vi. feet; stalks medium heavy and straight; 
nodes 14-16, nearly covered, not very prominent. Brace roots 
present, heavy, whorl complete and useful on two nodes. Tillers 
absent. Leaves long and broad, 38-40 x 5-6 inches; sheath equal 
to internode and occasionally longer. Tassels moderately long and 
heavy, 18-20 inches; terminal spike slightly drooping; lateral 
spikelets nearly horizontal, many present, moderately long and 
very crowded; bracts pale green, slightly striped with red; anthers 
buff l.deep colonial buff to chamois) ; 88-90 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 9th to 11th nodes, often two ears per stalk, 
with an occasional nubbin present. Husks many, thick and very 
tightly wrapped. Husked ears moderately long and plump, 
8-9 x 2-2 ! 4 inches; moderately tapering; base compressed, tip 
conical and nearly capped; rows 12-16, straight, very crowded 
around the cob and in the row. 

Kernels at milk stage white, medium width and deep; at dry 
stage pale creamy white, longer than wide, distinctly thin, 1.15 x .98 
x .29 cm. (132 seeds per oz.); nearly rectangular; crown rounded, 
nearly semicircular; surface very slightly dented, often nearly 
smooth; set very tight on cob. 

Norfolk Market. Refs. 403, 521, 533. 

This was introduced by George Tait and Sons of 
Norfolk, Virginia, in 1897 and has been continued by that 
company to the present time. It was advanced as 
superior to Adams Early and purported to be a valuable 
addition to the group. At Geneva 99 days were required 
for the ears of Norfolk Market to reach edible maturity. 
This was 5 days later than Truckers Favorite and 5 days 
earlier than Mexican June. 

Plant tall, 8-8 1 _> feet; stalks straight and moderately heavy. 
Tillers absent. Brace roots rather heavy, whorl complete and 
useful on one node. Leaves long and broad; sheath longer than 
internode. Ears borne at 7th and 8th nodes; shanks very long and 
heavy; husked ears moderately long and medium plump, 8-9 x l?^— 
1 J g inches, nearly cylindrical; rows 14—18, regular, well filled at the 
tip. Kernels in milk stage snow white, thin, medium width; 
at dry stage pale amber white, small, nearly round; crown semi- 
circular; surface dented; set tightly on white cob. 

Sioux Squaw. Ref. 212. Illus. 25. 

This variety may be used to represent a type of 
Indian corn which was very common among many 
Indian tribes. The diversity of dry kernel colors present 
on any one ear was apparently an attractive feature of 
this sort. In later years Oscar H. Will was instrumental 
in making various selections from the native squaw 
corn and thereby developed greater uniformity of color. 

Sioux Squaw produced edible ears in 76 days at 
Geneva, 6 days earlier than Early Adams, about the 
same season as Alpha, and 10 days later than Assiniboine. 
The plants were much the same as those of Assiniboine, 
although the ears were slightly shorter and decidedly 
less uniform in color. The various kernel colors in the 
dry stage suggest the novelty, and it is used occasionally 
by private gardeners for that purpose. 

Plant moderately short, 4— 4 1 ■> feet, stalks straight and slender. 
Tillers few, much shorter than central stalk. Tassel short and 
moderately slender, 12-15 inches, variable in bract and anther 
colors. Ears moderately long and medium plump, 7-8 x 1 ' _■ 1 T g 
inches, slightly tapering; rows 10-12, slightly curved. Kernels at 
milk stage white, medium size, rather shallow; at dry stage, variously 
colored, white, blue, pink, red, etc., broader than long, crown 
rounded, surface smooth; set tightly on cob. 

Truckers Favorite. Refs. 21, 403, 516, 533. 

Introduced by T. W. Wood and Sons of Richmond, 
Virginia, about 1899, this variety has proved to be one 



of the most popular of its kind. No information con- 
cerning its origin by the introducer is available although 
the George Tait and Sons Seed Company suggests that 
it developed as a selection from Early White Dent. 
Truckers Favorite produced edible ears in 94 days, 
4 days later than Large Adams and 4 days earlier than 
Stowell's Evergreen. The plants are slightly taller than 
those of Large Adams and have more prominent brace 
roots and heavier tassels with more laterals. The 
ear shanks are shorter and more slender, while the 
husked ears are slightly longer, more cylindrical, and 
much more rounded at the tip. The kernels in the dry 
stage are slightly longer in proportion to the width and 
have a rough instead of a smooth crown surface. The 
variety is used widely in the southern states where it is 
grown in the place of true sweet corn. 

Plant tall, 8-8 ! 2 feet; stalks slightly zigzag and heavy; nodes 
13-15, covered, not prominent. Brace roots present, heavy, useful 
and whorl complete on 1st and 2nd nodes. Tillers absent. Leaves 
moderately long and medium broad, 32-34 x 3 ' j— 4 ' L ' inches; 
sheath longer than internode. Tassel moderately long and heavy, 
18-20 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets horizontal, 
long, many present, crowded and multi-branched at the base; 
bracts green, sparsely striped with pale red and usually ringed 
with red at the base; anthers light reddish bronze (terra cotta); 
72-74 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 7th and 8th nodes, one and two ears per stalk, 
shank short and slender, 2-3 inches occasionally much longer, result- 
ing in pendant ears. Husk leaves few to none, very short and 
light when present. Husks many, short, heavy, very tightly 
wrapped and difficult to remove. Husked ear long and moderately 
plump, 8-10 x lJs - 2 inches, partly cylindrical and slightly tapering; 
base enlarged but compressed; tip rounded and capped; rows 
14—18, very crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage white, large and deep; at dry stage 
starchy white at crown with the remainder rather flinty, much 
longer than broad, 1.25 x .86 x .4 cm. (88 seeds per oz."); nearly 
rectangular in shape; crown slightly rounded; surface crease-dented 
and jagged, often beaked; set very tightly on cob. 

Silver King (522) is a white dent corn that can be 
used for early " roasting ears " or as an early field crop. 
At Geneva it was similar to Truckers Favorite. 

Tusearora. Refs. 87, 423, 507. Syns. Early Tuscarora, 
Large Tuscarora, Turkey Wheat. 

Concerning this flour corn variety, Sturtevant wrote 
in the New York Agricultural Experiment Station Report 
for 1884, " This variety was brought to New York by the 
Tuscarora Indians in 1712, when they emigrated from 
North Carolina, and it is supposed to be the variety under 
Indian culture at the time of the settlement." It was 
also recorded by Bonafous as growing on the banks 
of the Missouri River and was given the name Zea 
orylhrolepsis. 

Early reports indicate that Tuscarora was well 
liked by the Indians and later by the white man. Burr 
states " When ground in the ripe state, it was much less 
farinaceous and valuable for cooking or feeding stock 
than the fine, white, floury appearance of the kernel when 
cut or broken, would seem to indicate." It was listed 
at least as early as 1838 by Breck and Thorburn. 

Plant tall, 6-7 feet; moderately strong and vigorous. Ears 
borne 18-24 inches from the ground, 8-10 inches long, 1 3 4-2 inches 
in diameter at the base, tapering; 8-rowed, usually distinctly fur- 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



93 



rowed at the base. Kernels in the green state were of fair quality 
and considered a valuable sort by those to whom the sweetness of 
the sugar varieties is objectionable. The dry kernels very large, 
creamy white, frequently creased at the crown and borne on a 
red cob. 

Tuxpan. Ref. 307. 

Tuxpan is reputed to be a selected strain of a 
Mexican variety and was featured for the first time 
by the Kilgore Seed Company of Plant City, Florida, 
in 1931. This was the tallest, most vigorous grower 
of any maize grown at Geneva. Necessarily it did 
not produce edible ears until the last of the season, 
124 days being required to attain the proper stage 
of development. The plants were very tall, 9 to 10 feet; 
very heavy, often 2 1 _> inches in diameter; and entirely 
devoid of tillers. The tassel was about 20 inches long, 
very bushy, and had anthers rather uniform yellow in 
color (pinard yellow to warm buff). The ears were 
borne at the 14th and 15th nodes, were 8 to 9 inches 
long, medium plump, and contained 14 rows. Kernels 
in the milk stage were snow white, with a diverging 
crown. In the dry stage, they were starchy white, thin, 
and dented. 

White Australian. Ref. 88. Illus. 25, 91. 

White Australian has been used as roasting corn in 
the mountain states where the nights are too cool for 
the best growth of sweet corn. No record of its history 
is available, but it was offered by D. V. Burrell of Rocky 
Ford, Colorado, at least as early as 1909. 

Eighty-two days were necessary for edible ears to 
be produced at Geneva. This was in season with 
Adams Early, 6 days earlier than White Cory, and 2 days 
later than Whipple's Early. The plants are 1 to 1} £ feet 
taller than those of Adams Early, more slender and 
zigzag, inclined to tiller, and the nodes are less com- 
pletely covered by the sheath. The ears are borne 
slightly lower on longer shanks, while the husked ears 
are 3 inches longer, decidedly more slender, and have 
fewer rows. The kernels in the dry stage are flinty 
instead of dent. 

Plant tall, 7 feet; stalk slightly zigzag and moderately slender; 
nodes 8-9, nearly covered, not very prominent. Brace roots present 
and complete on one and occasionally two nodes, useful. Tillers 
few. Leaves medium long and moderately narrow, 28-30 inches 
x 3-3 ' o inches; sheath equal to internode. Tassel moderately long, 
18-20 inches; terminal spike nearly erect; lateral spikelets slightly 
drooping, many, medium long and crowded; bracts green striped 
with darker green; anthers buff (chamois); 64-66 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 3rd to 5th nodes, usually two ears per stalk. 
Shank long and heavy, 5-6 inches. Husk leaves few, short and 
light. Husks many, heavy, medium long, rather tightly wrapped 
and difficult to remove. Husked ear long and moderately slender, 
9-10 x 1 J _>— 1 ? ^ inches, nearly cylindrical; base compressed; tip 
conical and slightly exposed; rows 8-10, straight, regular, not 
crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage chalky white, medium width, thin and 
shallow; at dry stage flinty amber white, wider than long, .98 x 1.1 x 
.52 cm. 88 seeds per oz.l; oval; crown distinctly rounded, nearly 
semi-circular; surface hard and smooth; set tightly on cob. 

Pennsylvania Rare Ripe (515) is a long white flint 
much like White Australian and is used chiefly as a 
hominy corn. The grains are large, pure white, and 
are borne on long 8- to 10-rowed ears. 



Early Jefferson or Jefferson (87) was also similar in 
type to present-day White Australian. The plants and 
ears were slightly shorter, while the latter were reported 
to have had a delicate shade of rose-pink near the tip. 
This character (pink tip) often appears in several of the 
white dent varieties, although not consistent in the 
same variety from year to year. 

YELLOW-KERNELED VARIETIES 

Alaska Indian. Refs. 126, 180, 411. Syns. Alaska 
Early, New Alaska. 

This is possibly one of the earliest of all corn 
varieties. It is not a sweet corn but was offered in 1925 
by the Henry Field Seed Co., Shenandoah, Iowa, as a 
variety that could be grown in the far north and in high 
altitudes. The plant grows to a height of from 2 to 
3 feet. The ears are small and bright yellow. It is 
of chief value to the plant breeder. 

In general appearance, this variety is very much 
like Assiniboine. Edible maturity was reached at 
Geneva in 66 days, which corresponded exactly with the 
Assiniboine. The plants, however, average 1 foot shorter 
and the ears 3 to 4 inches shorter. The kernels are 
identical in shape, size, and color. Alaska Indian, 
although of equal quality to Assiniboine, has been 
largely replaced by the latter in the Northern Plains 
area chiefly because of its greater vigor and larger ear. 

Assiniboine Yellow. Refs. 242, 335, 557. Syn. 
Assiniboine. Illus. 25. 

Pictures and illustrations of Indian women preparing 
corn generally show ears of many colors, white, red, 
yellow, pink, blue, black, or even ears with mixed 
colors. George Will, whose admirable study, Corn 
Among the Indians of the Upper Missouri, pre- 
sents a wonderful picture of the Indian tribes inhabiting 
the Upper Missouri, the Northern Plains, and the Lakes' 
area, obtained and improved some of the native corn 
varieties. 

Among other strains which Mr. Will discovered was 
an early flour corn obtained from the Assiniboine Reser- 
vation in Saskatchewan about 1916. It was known to 
have been grown there for over 40 years, and therefore 
had become acclimated to that region of short season 
and scanty rainfall. After several years of selection, a 
pure yellow stock was introduced in 1920 by Oscar H. 
Will & Co. as Assiniboine Yellow. It was then con- 
sidered the earliest of the Indian Squaw corns and nearly 
equal to sweet corn in flavor. 

Edible maturity was reached at Geneva in 66 days, 
which proved to be about in season with Alaska Indian 
and 12 days earlier than Golden Bantam. Although 
it does not equal the true sweet corns in quality, its 
earliness, vigor, and more or less resistance to adverse 
weather conditions have rendered it useful in the North- 
ern Plains area as a source of green corn. It most 
resembles Alaska Indian, producing somewhat taller 
plants and much longer ears. In all other respects the 
two varieties are very similar. 

Plant moderately short 4 1 2 to 5 feet; stalk slender and straight; 
nodes 6-7, slightly exposed, moderately prominent. Tillers few, 



94 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



much shorter than central stalk. Leaves medium long and moder- 
ately narrow, 28-30 x 3-3 % inches, often red on the margin; sheath 
shorter than and occasionally equal to internode. Tassel short 
and slender, 12-15 inches; terminal spike erect; lateral spikelets 
nearly erect, few, medium long and crowded; bracts and anthers 
variable in color; 43-45 days to anthesis. 

Ears borne at 2nd and 3rd nodes, one and occasionally two 
ears per stalk. Shank long, 3-8 inches, slender and brittle. Husk 
leaves usually very long and heavy; husks moderately many, heavy, 
and rather tightly wrapped. Husked ear long and slender, 8-10, 
x 1 \ 2 1 *' » inches, slightly tapering; tip conical and slightly exposed, 
very often nearly capped: rows 8-10, moderately straight, occasion- 
ally spiral, crowded around the cob. 

Kernels at milk stage yellow, broad and shallow; at dry stage 
bright yellow, small, much broader than long, .8 x 1.05 x .42 cm. 
(108 seeds per ozJ : short, broad, oval in shape; crown very definitely 
and uniformly rounded; surface smooth, entirely devoid of wrinkling; 
set very tightly and firmly on cob. 

Early Canada. Refs. 87, 468. Syns. Canada Yel- 
low, Canadian Yellow Flint, Early Eight Rowed 
Canada. 
This variety was mentioned by Salisbury in 1848 
among others similar in type as an earlier and much 
smaller variety than either the Large 8-rowed Yellow 
Flint or the Middle Sized 8-rowed Yellow Flint. It was 
of this variety that Salisbury speaks when he wrote con- 
cerning the sweet varieties then in existence " There are 
several sub-varieties — , and a new variety made by 
crossing the sweet with the Early Canada." This sug- 



gests the possibility that the hybrid mentioned might 
have been the precursor of the small-eared yellow sweet 
varieties now represented by Golden Bantam. 

The following description is compiled from the 
earlier authors, chief of whom were Salisbury and Burr. 

Plant 4-5 feet tall, stalks slender; leaves rather scanty. The 
ears were small, 7 inches, uniform, tapering, eight-rowed with 
prominent furrows between pairs of rows; kernels nearly semi- 
circular at the crown; smooth, flinty surface, glossy orange-yellow 
in color; cob small, white. 

Norwegian (17) was also much like Early Canada 
but larger eared. 

Manhattan. Refs. 74, 271, 343, 450, 454, 503, 515, 
528. 
From 1895 to 1902, J. M. Thorburn & Co. listed this 
as Thorburn's Manhattan Sweet Corn. It was credited 
as being the earliest sweet corn grown ready for the 
table in 6 weeks from the time of planting. The dry 
kernels were not wrinkled and therefore the variety was 
not a true sweet corn. It originated in the extreme 
north as a yellow type, although occasionally the 
ears showed both yellow and white kernels. We sus- 
pect that Manhattan was another of the early Indian 
corns similar to Alaska Indian and Canada Yellow. 
When first introduced it was listed with the new, rare, 
and valuable vegetable seeds. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIETIES 



95 



SUPPLEMENTARY LIST OF OBSCURE VARIETIES 



The names given below represent varieties which 
can be considered of minor importance and about 
which little information is available; varieties which 
were in existence for a very short period; or varieties 
the seed of which is not available today and therefore 
no plantings could be made to secure descriptions or 



Alexander Sugar. Refs. 367, 

368. Syn. Early Alexander. 
Aliens Choice. Ref. 348. 
Amazement. Ref. 533. 
American Gold. Conn. Supl. to 

Cir. 94. 
Bates Extra Early. Refs. 14, 

17. 
Blood Red Sweet. Ref. 421. 
Bloomsdale Sugar. Refs. 315, 

533. 
Bonks Best. Ref. 487. 
Brainard Sugar. Ref. 311. 
Breaky. J. Ref. 560. 
Bryant. Ref. 238. Syn. Early 

Bryant, Ref. 289. 
Cambridge Sweet. Ref. 535. 
Campbell's Extra Early. Ref. 

454. 
Constantinople. Ref. 10. 
Cooper's Large Shoe Peg. Ref. 

370. 
Country Queen. Ref. 335. 
Crawford. Ref. 22. 
Cross. Ref. 405. 
Dessert. Ref. 533. 
Dreer's Best. Ref. 538. 
Dugan's Sweet. Ref. 404. 
Earliest on Earth. Ref. 326. 
Early. Ref. 335. 
Early Butler. Ref. 450. 
Early Cape May. Ref. 371. 

Syn. Havenstein's Early Cape 

May. 
Early Chance. Ref. 29. 
Early Dobson's Evergreen. Ref. 

518. 
Early Eight Weeks. Ref. 533. 
Early Express. Refs. 386, 484. 

Syn. Extra Early Express. 
Early Gem. Refs. 144, 537. 
Early Giant Wonder. Ref. 360 
Early Golden Majoram. Vaughan 

Cat. 1933. 
Early Golden Sweet. Vaughan 

Cat. 1933. 
Early Goose. Ref. 321. Syn. 

Extra Early Goose. 
Early Honey Cream. Ref. 301. 
Early Irondequoit. Refs. 249, 

348. 
Early Longfellow. Refs. 403, 

406. Syn. Longfellow Sugar. 
Early Marvel. Ref. 102. 



I Early Monarch. Refs. 148, 149, 

533. Syns. 80-Day Monarch, 

Ohio Monarch. 
Early Norfolk. Ref. 403. 
Early Page. Refs. 345, 564. 

Syn. Extra Early Page. 
Early Reliance. Ref. 135. Syn. 

First Crop Reliance. 
Early Sensational. Ref. 37. 
Early Windsor. Refs. 238, 241, 

406. 
Early XXX. Ref. 335. 
Early Yankee. Ref. 385. 
Eastwick. Ref. 361. 
Eclipse. Refs. 121, 401, 533. 

Syn. New Eclipse. 
Electric. Ref. 368. 
Eruda. Ref. 89. 
Eureka. Ref. 22. Syn. Eureka 

Early. 
Extra Early. Refs. 13, 552. 
Extra Early Dreer's. Ref. 91. 

Syn. Dreer's. 
Extra Early Independence. Ref. 

142. 
Extra Early Purity. Ref. 298. 
Extra Extra Early. Ref. 298. 
Farquhar Early. Ref. 22. 
First and Best. Refs. 22, 128. 
First Early. Ref. 241, 370. 
First in Market. Refs. 200, 238, 

239. Syn. Imitation. 
French Honey. Refs. 370, 533. 

Syn. New French Honey. 
Garwood. Ref. 238. 
General Grant. Ref. 216. 
Giddings. Ref. 22. 
Golden Margem. Conn. Supl. 

to Cir. 94. 
Hammonds Best. Ref. 238. 
Harmon. Ref. 533. 
Harris' Extra Early. Refs. 238, 

246, 406. 
Hartner's Early Pearl. Ref. 

550. Syn. Extra Early Pearl. 
Harvey's Early. Ref. 252. 
Heath's Early. Ref. 374. 
Hendersons Sugar. Refs. 61, 

125, 207. 
Hickman's Extra Early Three- 
Ear. Ref. 373. 
Hickox Hybrid. Ref. 508. 
Honey June. Count. Gent. Nov. 

1933. 14. 
Horsfords Little Giant. Ref. 439. 



determine their status with reference to recognized 
standard sorts. These variety names are included in 
the classified index under the appropriate section; viz., 
white-kerneled sweet corn, yellow-kerneled sweet corn 
and other forms of maize used as sweet corn. No name 
is listed unless a definite reference can also be cited. 



Hyde's Earliest Sugar. Ref. 371. 
Indiana Wonder. Refs. 156, 

515, 533. 
Jack Frost. Ref. 320. Syn. 

Early Sweet Jack Frost. 
June Market. Ref. 533. 
Kendel's Early Market. Ref. 

405. 
Keystone Wonder. Ref. 533. 
King of the Earlies. Refs. 22, 

367, 441. 
Kloochman. Ref. 335. 
Krein-Bring. Ref. 151. 
Landreth Early. Ref. 537. 
Landreth Hybrid. Ref. 314. 
Large Connecticut. Ref. 271. 
Late Red Cob. Ref. 1 7. 
London Market. Ref. 22. 
Macomber. Ref. 368. 
Mammoth White Surprise. Ref. 

397. 
Manchester. Ref. 94. 
Manitowoc. Ref. 349. Syn. 

Extra Early Manitowoc. 
Maple Sugar. Ref. 35. Syn. 

Early Maple Sugar. 
Mohawk Valley Extra Early. 

Ref. 369. 
Musser. Ref. 238. 
New Corn No. 7. Refs. 516, 517. 
New Early Daybreak. Refs. 

184, 401. Syns. Early Day- 
break, Daybreak. 
New England Orange. Ref. 90. 
New Rose. Ref. 501. 
New York Family. Ref. 383. 
North Star. Ref. 533. 
Northern Success. Refs. 335, 

533. 
Northrup King & Co. XXXX. 

Refs. 240, 241, 515, 533. 
Noxal. Ref. 241. 
Oakview Market. Refs. 174, 

238, 241. 
Orange County Cream. Ref. 22. 
Peachblow. Ref. 370. Syn. New 

Peachblow. 
Pearl of Waterloo. Ann. of 

Hort. 1892. 171. 
Perfection 2nd Early. Ref. 485. 
Philadelphia Favorite. Ref. 

363. 
Phillip's New Wonder. Refs. 

241, 391, 394. Syn. New 

Early Wonder. 



Potter's Superb. Ref. 364. 
Pride of Chenango. Ref. 533. 
Rennies XXX. Ref. 409. 
Ringleader. Ref. 518. 
Robinson's Early. Ref. 155. 
Ruby Queen. Ref. 22. 
St. Louis Market. Refs. 396, 

533. 
Sampson's Early. Ref. 516. 
Schell's Silver Beauty. Ref. 473. 
Second Early. Ref. 151. 
Second Early Standard. Ref. 

500. 
Shedaker's Choice. Ref. 479. 
Simmond's Special. Ref. 335. 
Simpsonia Prolific. Ref. 368. 

Syn. Simpsonia. 
Smith's Early White. Ref. 271. 
Sonderegger's Earliest. Ref. 

489. 
Southern Express. Ref. 533. 
Standard Earliest. Ref. 500. 
Standard Main Crop. Ref. 500. 
Striped Evergreen. Refs. 238, 

282. Syn. New Striped Ever- 
green. 
Sugar Kernel. Ref. 362. 
Sugar Loaf. Refs. 241, 359. 
Sugar XX. Refs. 207, 208, 352. 
Sure Cropper Sugar. Count. 

Gent. Nov. 1933. 14. 
Sweet Cream. Ref. 389. 
Table Pedigree. Ref. 503. 
Telephone. Refs. 240, 405, 412. 

Syn. Telephone Sweet. 
The Carolina. Ref. 8. 
The Don. Refs. 516, 518, 547. 
Triple Ear. Ref. 110. 
Troy Market. Refs. 520, 533. 
Truckers Early. Ref. 403. 
Tuckit. Ref. 533. 
Uncle Sam. Ref. 298. 
Verifirst. Ref. 345. 
Vermont Pedigree. Ref. 22. 
Washburn. Refs. 1, 302. 
White Cob. Refs. 405, 513. 

Syn. Early White Cob. 
White Sweet. Ref. 335. 
White Wonder. Refs. 241, 305. 

Syn. Kendel's Early White 

Wonder. 
Wisconsin Beauty. Ref. 533. 
Wyoming. Refs. 428, 507, 508. 
Yexo Sugar. Refs. 253, 533. 



96 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
21. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 

29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
31. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
51. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 

60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
71. 

75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 



Aabling-Boyce Cat. 1918. 

Abbott & Cobb Cat. 1927. 

Adams, T. Lee, Cat. 1923. 

Aggeler and Musser Cat. 1918. 

Aggeler and Musser Cat. 1922. 

Aggeler and Musser Cat. 1928. 

Aggeler and Musser Cat. 1931. 

Alexander Seed Co. Cat. 1904. 

Allen, R. H., & Co. Cat. 1870. 

Allen, R. L., Co. Cat. 1860. 

Alneer Bros. Cat. 1922. 

Alneer Bros. Cat. 1923. 

Amer. Agric. 137. 1864. 

Amer. Agric. 179. 1870. 

Amer. Agric. 85. 1874. 

Amer. Gard. 19:271. 1898. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. 134. 1867. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. 120. 1871. 

Anthony, H. C, Cat. 1913. 

Archias Seed Store Cat. 1902. 

Assoc. Seed Co. Cat. 1933. 

Bailey. L. H. Ann. of Hort. 115-116. 1889. 

Balentine, Walter Me. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:103. 

Barteldes, F., and Co. Cat. 1892. 

Barteldes Seed Co. Cat. 1912. 

Barteldes Seed Co. Cat. 1922. 

Barteldes Seed Co. Cat. 1925. 

Becker-Dillinger, J. Handbuch des Gesamten Gemusebaues. 

Paul Parey, Berlin. 975-984. 1924. 
Beckert Seed Store Cat. 1913. 
Beckert Seed Store Cat. 1914. 
Beckert Seed Store Cat. 1917. 
Beckert Seed Store Cat. 1918. 
Beckert Seed Store Cat. 1922. 
Beckert Seed Store Cat. 1923. 
Bell, J. J., Co. Cat. 1922. 

Bement C. N. Trans. N. Y. Agric. Soc. 321-353. 1853. 
Berry, A. A., Co. Cat. 1914. 
Boddington, A. T., Co. Cat. 1913. 
Boddington, A. T., Co. Cat. 1917. 
Bolgiano, F. W., & Co. Cat. 1913. 
Bolgiano, F. W., & Co. Cat. 1922. 
Bolgiano, F. W., & Co. Cat. 1923. 
Bolgiano, F. W., & Co. Cat. 1926. 
Bolgiano, F. W., & Co. Cat. 1928. 
Bolgiano, F. W., & Co. Cat. 1932. 
Bolgiano, J., & Son Cat. 1906. 
Bolgiano, J., & Son Cat. 1912. 
Bolgiano, J., & Son Cat. 1925. 

Brackett, C. N. Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 98. 1870. 
Brackett, C. N. Proc. Mass. Hort. Soc. 190. 1874. 
Brackett, C. N. Proc. Mass. Hort. Soc. 175. 1879. 
Brackett, C. N. Proc. Mass. Hort. Soc. 170. 1882. 
Brackett, C. N. Proc. Mass. Hort. Soc. 269. 1888. 
Brackett, C. N. Proc. Mass. fforf. Soc. 289. 1894. 
Breck, J., & Sons Cat. 1915. 
Breck, J., & Sons Cat. 1917. 
Breck, J., & Sons Cat. 1919. 
Breck, J., & Sons Cat. 1923. 
Brill, Francis. Farm Gardening and Seed Growing. 88-89. 

Orange Judd. 1895. 
Bromfield, E. T., Cat. 1923. 

Brose, C. M. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:32-33. 
Brunjes, M. H., & Sons Cat. 1913. 
Buckbee H. W., Cat. 1902. 

1906. 

1896. 

1908. 

1913. 

1921. 



Buckbee, H. W., Cat. 



Buist, R. 
Buist, R. 
Buist, R. 



& Co. Cat. 
& Co. Cat. 
& Co. Cat. 
Burbank, L. Gardening, 5:326-531. 
Burbank, L., Co. Cat. 1922. 
Burgess Seed & Plant Co. Cat. 1927. 
Burnett Bros. Cat. 1910. 
Burnett Bros. Cat. 1918. 

Burnett, F. H. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 27:885-887. 1894. 
Burnett, F. H., Watson E., and Stubbs, W. C. La. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Bui. 42:1516. 1896. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 1892. 

1893. 
1896. 
1902. 
1903. 
1906. 
1907. 
1909. 



111. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 
111. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 
111. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 



Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 
Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 



83. Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 1925. 

84. Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 1927. 
83. Burpee, W. Atlee, Co Cat. 1928. 

86. Burpee, W. Atlee, Co. Cat. 1930. 

87. Burr, Fearing, Jr. Field and Garden Vegetables of America. 

1863. Crosby and Nichols, Boston. 

88. Burrell, D. V., Cat. 1909. 

89. Burrill, T. J., and McCluer, G. W. 

4:128-138. 1888. 

90. Burrill, T. J., and McCluer, G. W. 

8:274-287. 1889. 

91. Burrill, T. J., and McCluer, G. W. 

13:432^143. 1890. 

92. Butz, Geo. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 10:11. 1890. 

93. Butz, Geo. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:145. 

91. Butz, Geo. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1891:155-156. 

95. Butz, Geo. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1892:124-125. 

96. Butz, Geo. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1893:131-132. 

97. Butz, Geo. C. Pa. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1896:116-117. 

98. Butzer, J. J., Cat. 1928. 

99. Cadwell & Jones Cat. 1913. 

100. Cadwell & Jones Cat. 1923. 

101. Carters Inc. (Amer. Cat.) 1917. 

102. Carters Inc. (Amer. Cat.) 1923. 

103. Cashman Seed Co. Cat. 1921. 

104. Cassel, F. P., & Son, Cat. 1927. 

105. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1892. 

106. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1893. 

107. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1900. 

108. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1904. 

109. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1905. 

110. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1914. 

111. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1916. 

112. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1919. 

113. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1923. 

114. Childs, J. L., Cat. 1926. 

115. Comstock, Ferre Co. Cat. 1933. 

116. Condon Bros. Cat. 1913. 

117. Condon Bros. Cat. 1923. 

118. Conn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 264: 199. 1925. 

119. Conn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 322:130. 1930. 

120. Coote, G. Ore. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 22:8. 1893. 

121. Coryell, R. J. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 109:51-54. 1894. 

122. Cox Seed Co. Cat. 1896. 

123. Crandall, C. S., and Hoffington, M. J. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Bui. 26:19-21. 1894. 

124. Culpepper, C. W., and Magoon, C. A. Jour. Agr. Res. 28: 

437. 1924. 

125. Curtis, C. L. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 32:17-18. 1891. 

126. Curtis, C. L. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 38:17-19. 1892. 

127. Dakota Imp. Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 

128. Dakota Imp. Seed Co. Cat. 1921. 

129. Dallwig, W. E., Cat. 1914. 

130. Dallwig, W. E., Cat. 1922. 

131. Darling & Beahan Cat. 1913. 

132. Darling & Beahan Cat. 1915. 

133. De Giorgi Bros. Cat. 1914. 

134. De Giorgi Bros. Cat. 1921. 

135. De Giorgi Bros. Cat. 1930. 

136. Deposit Seed Co. Cat. 1923. 

137. Devol, W. S. Nev. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:19. 

138. Dreer, H. A., Cat. 1894. 

139. Dreer, H. A., Cat. 1902. 
1 HI. Dreer, H. A., Cat. 1903. 

111. Dreer, H. A., Cat. 1920. 

1 12. Dreer, H. A., Cat. 1927. 

143. Dunning, R. B., & Co. Cat. 1908. 
1 11. Dunning, R. B., & Co. Cat. 1913. 
115. Dunning, R. B., & Co. Cat. 1921. 
146. Dunning, R. B., & Co. Cat. 1927. 
1 17. Ebeling, F. H., Cat. 1900. 
1 1«. Ebeling, F. H., Cat. 1912. 
1 19. Ebeling, F. H., Cat. 1915. 

150. Ebeling, F. H., Cat. 1923. 

151. Ely Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 

132. Emerson, T. W., Co. Cat. 1914. 
153. Emerson, T. W., Co. Cat. 1918. 
151. Emerson, T. W., Co. Cat. 1924. 
155. Everitt, J. A., Inc. Cat. 1892. 
136. Everitt, J. A., Inc. Cat. 1899. 

157. Everitt, J. A., Inc. Cat. 1927. 

158. Farmer Seed & Nur. Cat. 1914. 

159. Fanner Seed & Nur. Cat. 1925. 

160. Farmer Seed & Nur. Cat. 1927. 

161. Farquhar, R. & J., Co. Cat. 1895. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



97 



162. 

16.5. 

161. 

165. 

166. 

167. 

168. 

169. 

170. 

171. 

172. 

173. 

171. 

175. 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 

181. 

1!!2 

IRi. 

lilt. 

185. 

186. 

187. 

188. 

189. 

190. 

191. 

192. 

193. 

191. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

20ft. 

201. 
202. 
203. 

2ol. 
205. 
206. 
2o7. 
208. 
2i 19. 
210. 
211. 
212. 
213. 
211. 

21.i. 
216. 
217. 
218. 
219. 
220. 
221. 
222. 
223! 
221. 
223. 
226. 
227. 
228 '. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
231. 
235. 
236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 
2H). 

211. 

2t2. 

243. 



Farquhar, R. 
Farquhar. R. 
Farquhar, R. 
Farquhar. R. 
Farquhar, R. 
Ferry, D. M. 



& J., Co. Cat. 
8s J.. Co. Cat. 
& J.. Co. Cat. 
8s J.. Co. Cat. 
86 J., Co. Cat. 



1898. 
1900. 
1908. 
1913. 
1931. 



Ferry, 
Ferry. 
Ferry. 
Percy, 
Ferry, 



8s Co. Cat. 
M., 8s Co. Cat. 



V. 
M., 
M., 
M., 



& Co. Cat. 
& Co. Cat. 
8s Co. Cat. 
& Co. Cat. 
& Co. Cat. 
& Co. Cat. 



1875. 
1883. 
1888. 
1891. 
1892. 
1893. 
1899. 
1902. 
1913. 
1917. 
1922. 



Ferry. D. M 

Ferry. D. M 

Ferrv. D. M., 8s Co. Cat. 

Ferry, D. M., & Co. Cat. 

Ferrv. D. M.. 8s Co. Cat. 

Field, H.. Co. Cat. 1907. 

Field, H., Co. Cat. 1921. 

Field, H.. Co. Cat. 1925. 

Fiske. H. E.. Co. Cat. 1907. 

Fiske, H. E.. Co. Cat. 1925. 

Fiske. H. E., Co. Cat. 1926. 

Forbes. A.. St. Co. Cat. 1918. 

Forbes, A.. 8s Co. Cat. 1922. 

Forbes. A.. 8s Co. Cat. 1923. 

Forbes. A.. 8s Co. Cat. 1929. 

Ford, F.. 8s Son Cat. 1892. 

Ford Seed Co. Cat. 1901. 

Ford Seed Co. Cat. 1907. 

Ford Seed Co. Cat. 1915. 

Ford Seed Co. Cat. 1926. 

Forrest Seed Co. Cat. 1923. 

Forrest Seed Co. Cat. 1929. 

Fottler. Fiske & Rawson Cat. 1916. 

Fottler, Fiske 8c Rawson Cat. 1920. 

Fottler. Fiske & Rawson Cat. 1921. 

Freeman. G. F. Ariz. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 75:1915. 

Frotscher. Rich., Cat. 1895. 

Geismar, L. M., and Smith, C. D. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Spec. Bui. 28:24. 1904. 
Germaine Seed 8s PI. Co. Cat. 1908. 
Germaine Seed 8s PI. Co. Cat. 1911. 
5 PI. Co. Cat. 1912. 
1914. 
1924. 
1925. 

Gould, H. P. Me. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 27:156-158. 1896. 
Gould, H. P. Me. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1895:79-81. 
Gould, R. L., 8s Co. Cat. 1928. 
Gould. R. L.. Ss Co. Cat. 1931. 
Grand Jet. Seed Co. Cat. 1924. 
Grand Jet. Seed Co. Cat. 1925. 
Grand Rapids Gr. Asso. Cat. 1926. 
Green, S. B. Minn. Agr. Exp. Sta 

243^4. 
Gregory, Jas. J., Cat. 1870. 
Gregory, Jas. J., Cat. 1873. 
Gregory, J. J. H., & Son Cat. 

J. H., & Son Cat. 

J. H., & Son Cat. 

J. H., 

J. H., 

J. H., 

J. H. 



Germaine Seed 
Gill Bros. Cat. 
Gill Bros. Cat. 
Gill Bros. Cat. 



Bien. Rpt. 1887-88: 



Gregory, J 
Gregory, J 
Gregory, J 
Gregory. J 
Gregory. J 
Gregory, J 
Gregory, J 
Gregory, J 
Grey. T. J 



Son Cat. 
1 Son Cat. 
& Son Cat. 
& Son Cat. 
J. H., St, Son Cat. 



1885. 
1890. 
1892. 
1893. 
1897. 
1904. 
1906. 
1911. 
1924. 



J. H.. 8s Son Cat. 
. Co. Cat. 1915. 
Griffith 8s Turner Co. Cat. 1902. 
Griswold Seed 8s Nur. Cat. 1919. 
Griswold, Thos., 8s Co. Cat. 1914. 
Griswold, Thos., 8s Co. Cat. 1918. 
Griswold, Thos., 8s Co. Cat. 1927. 
Griswold. Thos., Co. Cat. 1928. 
Gurney Seed 8s Nur. Co. Cat. 1909. 
Gurney Seed 8s Nur. Co. Cat. 1920. 
Gurney Seed & Nur. Co. Cat. 1922. 
Halsted, Byron D. The Vegetable Garden l(4):25. 1882. 

E. H. Libby, Chicago. 
Halsted, B. D. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 179:4-11. 1904. 
Halsted, B. D., Owen, E. J., and Shaw, J. K. N. J. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1905. 428-442. 
Hammond, H. N., Inc., Cat. 1903. 
Hansen, N. E., and Thornber, W. S. S. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Bui. 68:137. 1900. 
Hansen, N. E., Fuljerson, V., and Sanderson, E. G. S. D. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 91:17-21. 1905. 
Harrington, F. M., and Thornber, H. Mont. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Rpt. 1921:61. 
Harris, Joseph. Gardening for Young and Old 62-64. Orange 

Judd. 1883. 



211. 
245. 

216. 
217. 
2Ht. 
219. 
250. 
251. 
252. 
253. 
251. 
2.'>5. 

256. 
257. 
258. 
259. 
260. 
261. 
262. 
263. 
261. 
265. 
266. 
267. 
268. 
269. 
270. 
271. 
272. 
273. 
274. 
275. 
276. 
277. 
278. 
279. 
280. 
281. 
282. 
283. 
281. 
285. 
286. 
287. 
288. 
289. 
290. 
291. 
292. 
293. 
291. 
295. 

296. 
297. 
298. 
299. 
300. 
301. 
302. 
303. 
304. 
305. 
306. 
307. 
308. 

309. 

310. 
311. 
312. 
313. 
314. 
313. 
316. 
317. 
318. 
319. 
320. 
321. 
322. 
323. 
321. 
325. 
326. 
327. 
328. 
329. 



Profit 142-144. Orange 



Henderson, P., 
Henderson, P., 
Henderson, P., 
Henderson, P., 
Henderson, P., 
Henderson, P., 



1889:320. 
1890:287. 



1891. 



Harris, Jos., Co. Cat. 1893. 
Harris, Jos., Co. Cat. 1914. 
Harris, Jos., Co. Cat. 1916. 
Harris, Jos., Co. Cat. 1920. 
Harris, Jos., Co. Cat. 1927. 
Hart 8s Vick Cat. 1927. 
Hart, Chas. O, Co. Cat. 1927. 
Hart, Chas. C, Co. Cat. 1932. 
Harvey Seed Co. Cat. 1909. 
Hastings, H. G., 8s Co. Cat. 1911. 
Hastings, H. G., 8s Co. Cat. 1915. 
Henderson, Peter. Gardening for 

Judd. 1867. 
Henderson, P., 8s Co. Cat. 1892. 
Henderson, P., 8s Co. Cat. 1898. 

8s Co. Cat. 1900. 

8s Co. Cat. 1906. 

8s Co. Cat. 1907. 

8s Co. Cat. 1911. 

8s Co. Cat. 1915. 

8s Co. Cat. 1924. 
Henderson, P., 8s Co. Cat. 1927. 
Holmes Seed Co. Cat. 1915. 
Holmes Seed Co. Cat. 1918. 
Holmes Seed Co. Cat. 1923. 
Horticulturist 2:464. 1847-48. 
Horticulturist 4:486-487. 1849-50. 
Horticulturist 6: 53. 1851. 
Horticulturist 12:216-218. 1857. 
Hovey 8s Co. Cat. 1859. 
Howard, F., Cat. 1915. 
Hunn, C. E. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 
Hunn, C. E. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 
Hunt, Wm. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1923. 
Hunt, Wm. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1928. 
Ingersoll, C. L. Nebr. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 19:6 
Inland Seed Co. Cat. 1927. 
Iowa Seed Co. Cat. 1899. 
Iowa Seed Co. Cat. 1902. 
Iowa Seed Co. Cat. 1905. 
Iowa Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 
Isbell, S. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1906. 
Isbell, S. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1907. 
Isbell, S. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1912. 
Isbell, S. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1925. 
Isbell, S. M., 8s Co. Cat. 1926. 
Jerrard, Geo. W. P., Cat. 1892. 
Johnson 8s Stokes Cat. 1892. 
Johnson 8s Stokes Cat. 1893. 
Johnson 8s Stokes Cat. 1901. 
Johnson 8s Stokes Cat. 1905. 
Johnson 8s Stokes Cat. 1913. 
Jones, H. A., and Rosa, J. T. Truck Crop Plants 22 : 23. 1928. 

McGraw-Hill. 
Jones Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 
Jones, O. S., Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 
your. Roy. Hort. Soc. 53:178. 1928. 
Jung, J. W., Co. Cat. 1918. 
Jung, J. W., Co. Cat. 1923. 
Jung, J. W., Co. Cat. 1929. 
Kaufman, J., Cat. 1927. 
Kendall 8s Whitney Cat. 1918. 
Kendall 8s Whitney Cat. 1922. 
Kendel, A. C, Cat. 1918. 
Kendel, A. C, Cat. 1919. 
Kilgore Seed Co. Cat. 1929. 
Kornicke, Friedrich. Systematische Uebersichtder Cerealien 

und Monocarpischen Leguminosen. 1873. 
Kornicke, Friedrich, and Weiner. Handbuch des Gestreide- 

banes 1:366-367. 1885. 
Lagomarsino, F., 8s Sons Cat. 1931. 
Landreth, D., 8s Sons Cat. 1872. 
Landreth, D., 6s Sons Cat. 1892. 
Landreth, D., 8s Sons Cat. 1898. 
Landreth, D., 8s Sons Cat. 1906. 
Landreth, D., 8s Sons Cat. 1913. 
Landreth, D., 8s Sons Cat. 1917. 
Landreth, D., Seed Co. Cat. 1933. 
Leonard Seed Co. Cat. 1916. 
Leonard Seed Co. Cat. 1933. 
Lilly, Chas. H., 8s Co. Cat. 1913. 
Lindholm, Chas. J., Cat. 1922. 
Livingston, A. W., 8s Sons, Cat. 1893. 
Livingston, A. W., 8s Sons, Cat. 1898. 
Livingston Seed Co. Cat. 1907. 
Livingston Seed Co. Cat. 1913. 
Livingston Seed Co. Cat. 1915. 
Low, Aaron Proc. Mass. Hort. Soc. 29-41. 1898. 
Macoun, W. T. Canada Exp. Farms Rpt. 1901:124. 
Macoun, W. T. Canada Exp. Farms Rpt. 1903:115. 



98 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



330. 

331. 

332. 

333. 

331. 

333. 
336. 
337. 
338. 

339. 
340. 
311. 
312. 
313. 
311. 
315. 

316. 
317. 
3 Hi. 
319. 
350. 
351. 
352. 
353. 
351. 
355. 
356. 
357. 
358. 
359. 
360. 
361. 
362. 
363. 
361. 
363. 
366. 
367. 
368. 
369. 
370. 
371. 
372. 
373. 
371. 
375. 
376. 
377. 
378. 
379. 
380. 
381. 
382. 
383. 
381. 
385. 
386. 
3H7. 
388. 
389. 
390. 
391. 
392. 
393. 
391. 
395. 
396. 
397. 
398. 
399. 
400. 
401. 
402. 
403. 

401. 
405. 
406. 

407. 

408. 



W. 

21. 



Macoun 

1921. 
Macoun, W 

1922. 22. 
Macoun, 

1923. 
Macoun, 

1924. 
Macoun, 

1925. 



W. 
39. 
W. 
22. 
W. 



T. Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. Div. of Hort. 

T. Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. Div. of Hort. 

T. Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. Div. of Hort. 

T. Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. Div. of Hort. 



T. Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. Div. of Hort. 



21:24. 



1927. 20-23. 



Bui. 82:177-189. 



Macoun, W. T. Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. 
McCullough, J. M., Cat. 1922. 
McCullough, J. M., Sons Cat. 1930. 
McHatton, T. H. Ca. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

1908. 
McKenzie. A. E., Cat. 1923. 
Mag. of Hort. 4:86. 1838. 
Mag. of Hort. 16:529. 1850. 
Mag. of Hort. 19:9-10. 1853. 
Mag. of Hort. 20:574. 1854. 

Magoon, C. A. The Canner Conv. 58: 118. 1924. 
Magruder, Roy. Ohio Agr. Exp. Sta. Bimon. Bui. 14:No. 1. 

1929. 
Magruder, Roy. Ohio Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 431:96. 1929. 
Magruder, Roy. Ohio Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1930:118-119. 
Magruder, Roy. Ohio Agr. Exp. Sta. Bimon. Bui. 148:1931. 
Manitowoc Seed Co. Cat. 1910. 

Mathews, C. W. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 50:42^5. 1894. 
Maule, Wm. H., Cat. 1889. 
Maule, Wm. H., Cat. 1894. 
Maule, Wm. H., Cat. 1901. 
Maule, Wm. H., Cat. 1909. 
Maule, Wm. H., Cat. 1911. 
Maule. Wm. H., Cat. 1920. 
Mellen, Geo. H., Co. Cat. 1926. 
Michell, H. F., Cat. 1899. 
Michell, H. F., Cat. 1906. 

1913. 

1917. 

1922. 

1932. 
1898. 
1904. 
1907. 
Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:135. 
Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:157. 



Michell, H. F., Cat. 



Michell, H. 
Michell, H. 
Michell, H. 
Mills, F. B 
Mills, F. B 
Mills, F. B 
Minott, C. W 
Minott, C. W 



F., Cat. 
F., Cat. 
F., Cat. 

Co. Cat. 

Co. Cat. 

Co. Cat. 



Mohawk Valley Seed Co. Cat. 
Moore & Simon Cat. 1907. 
Moore Seed Co. Cat. 1909. 
Moore Seed Co. Cat. 1914. 
Moore Seed Co. Cat. 1927. 
Morris & Snow Seed Co. Cat. 
Morris & Snow Seed Co. Cat. 
Morse, C. C, & Co. Cat. 
Morse, C. C, & Co. Cat. 
Morse, C. C, & Co. Cat. 
Morse, C. C, 8s Co. Cat. 
Morse, C. C, & Co. Cat. 
Morse, C. C, & Co. Cat. 



1892. 



1914. 
1917. 



1907. 

1911. 

1919. 

1923. 

1927. 

1929. 

Newman, C. L. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 34:124. 1895. 
N. Y. Market Gard. Assoc. Cat. 1893. 
N. Y. Sun Feb. 23, 1919. 
Noll, J. F., & Co. Cat. 1902. 
Noll, J. F., & Co. Cat. 1907. 
Noll, J. F., & Co. Cat. 1913. 
Northrup, King & Co. Cat. 1907. 
Northwestern Seed Co. Cat. 1896. 
Olds, L. L., Seed Co. Cat. 1920. 
Page-Phillips Seed Co. Cat. 1919. 

Parker, A. C. N. Y. Educ. Dept. Bui. 482:41^3. 1910. 
Perry, A. D., Cat. 1890. 
Phillips, H., Seed & Imp!. Co. Cat. 1910. 
Pierson, F. R., Co. Cat. 1899. 
Plant & Seed Co. Cat. 1902. 

Plumb, C. S. Tenn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3:No. 2:3-7. 1890. 
Porter-Walton Co. Cat. 1928. 
Portland Seed Co. Cat. 1909. 
Portland Seed Co. Cat. 1928. 
Price, Geo. H., Cat. 1913. 
Price, Geo. H., Cat. 1933. 
Price, H. L., and Drinkard, Jr., A. W. Va. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Rpt. 1908:95-99. 
Rane, F. W. W. Va. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 39:151-152. 1895. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 51:1898. 
Rane, F. W., and Hall, H. F. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 125: 

165-167. 1906. 
Rawson, W. W. Success in Market Gardening and Vegetable 

Growers Manual. 112-114. 1887. Rawson, Boston. 
Rawson, W. W. Success in Market Gardening and Vegetable 
Growers Manual. 126-129. 1892. Rawson, Boston. 



409. 
410. 
411. 
412. 
413. 

414. 

415. 
416. 
417. 
418. 
419. 
420. 
421. 
122. 
123. 
12 1. 
125. 
426. 
427. 
428. 
429. 
430. 
431. 
432. 
433. 
431. 
435. 
436. 
437. 
438. 
439. 
111). 
441. 
442. 
443. 
111. 
413. 
416. 
417. 
418. 
449. 
450. 
151. 
452. 
453. 
451. 
455. 
456. 
457. 
458. 
459. 
460. 
461. 
462. 
463. 
461. 
465. 
466. 
467. 
468. 
469. 
470. 
471. 
472. 
473. 
474. 
475. 
476. 
177. 
478. 
479. 
480. 
481. 
482. 
483. 
484. 
485. 
486. 
187. 
488. 
489. 
190. 
491. 
192. 
193. 
191. 
495. 
496. 



Rural N. Y. 11:135 
Rural N. Y. 12:2. 
Rural N. Y. 12:45. 
Rural N. Y. 12:117. 
Rural N. Y. 12:261. 
Rural N. Y. 12:268. 
Rural N. Y. 12:281. 
Rural N. Y. 42:476. 
Rural N. Y. 12:535. 
Rural N. Y. 13:477. 
Rural N. Y. 13:495. 
Rural N. Y. 43:511. 
Rural N. Y. 13:527. 
Rural N. Y. 43:542. 
Rural N. Y. 43 : 586. 
Rural N. Y. 
Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y. 15:738. 
Rural N. Y. 45:773. 
Rural N. Y. 43:822. 

y. 



13:603. 
13:619. 
15:218. 



Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 
Rural N. 



16:19. 

47:161. 

48:141. 

48:528. 

48:760. 

51:181. 

51:315. 

52:223. 

51:314. 

51:411. 

55:140. 



Rennie, Wm., Co. Ltd. Cat. 1931. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3:1889. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 20:21-24. 1893. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1893:190-191. 
Robb, O. J. Onr. Dept. of Agr. Vineland Sta. Rpt. 1918: 

19-20. 
Robinson, W. The Vegetable Garden. Ed. 3. 400-01. 

1920. John Murray, London. 
Ross Bros. Seed House Cat. 1913. 
Routledge Seed & Flor. Co. Cat. 1918. 
Rural N. Y. 11:111. 1863. 

1863. 

1883. 

1883. 

1883. 

1883. 

1883. 

1883. 

1883. 

1883. 

1884. 

1884. 

1884. 

1884. 

1884. 

1884. 

1884. 

1884. 

1886. 

1886. 

1886. 

1886. 

1887. 

1888. 

1889. 

1889. 

1889. 

1892. 

1892. 

1893. 

1895. 

1895. 

1896. 

1896. 

1896. 

1896. 

1896. 

1897. 

1897. 

1897. 

1897. 

1901. 

1901. 

1903. 

1905. 

1906. 

1906. 

1910. 

1916. 

1917. 
1923. 

Salisbury, J. H. Trans. N. Y. Agr. Soc. 678-845. 1848. 
Salzer, J. A., Cat. 1905. 
Salzer, J. A., Cat. 1913. 
Salzer, J. A., Cat. 1920. 
Saul, Chas. F., Cat. 1913. 
Schell, W. S., Inc. Cat. 1924. 
1927. 
1932. 
1933. 
1928. 
Schneck, H. W. Cornell Ext. Bui. 176:38-42. 1928. 
Scott, J. W. Cat. 1927. 

Sherman, L. W. Ohio Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 431:147. 1929. 
Shumway, R. H., Cat. 1922. 
Sibley, Hiram, & Co. Cat. 1883. 
Simon, I. N., & Son Cat. 1913. 
Simon, I. N., & Son Cat. 1915. 
Simon, I. N., & Son Cat. 1923. 
Simon, I. N., & Son Cat. 1929. 

Smith, J. G. Nebr. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 12:41-46. 1889. 
Smith, J. L. Proc. Mass. Hort. Soc. 203. 1916. 
Sonderegger's Nur. & Seed House Cat. 1915. 
Spokane Seed Co. Cat. 1928. 
Stabler, A. Md. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 96:1904. 
Stark Bros. Cat. 1929. 
State Nursery Co. Cat. 1929. 
Steckler, J., Seed Co. Cat. 1910. 
Stokes, F. C, & Co. Cat. 1924. 
Stokes, F. C, & Co. Cat. 1926. 



Rural N. Y. 55:515. 
Rural N. Y. 55:522. 
Rural N. Y. 55:562. 
Rural N. Y. 55:770. 
Rural N. Y. 56:245. 
Rural N. Y. 56:262. 
Rural N. Y. 56:311. 
Rural N. Y. 56:534. 
Rural N. Y. 60:614. 
Rural N. Y. 60:662. 
Rural N. Y. 62:822. 
Rural N. Y. 61:204. 



Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y 
Rural N. Y 



65:264. 
65:698. 
69:467. 
75:915. 
76:276. 
82:1309. 



Schell, W. S., Inc. Cat. 
Schell, W. S., Inc. Cat. 
Schell, W. S., Inc. Cat. 
Schling. Max, Inc. Cat. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



99 



4<)T. Stokes. F. C. & Co. Cat. 1929. 

498. Stokes, F. C, & Co. Cat. 1933. 

I"'). Stokes Seed Farm Co. Cat. 1920. 

BOO. Stokes, W. P., Cat. 1913. 

601. Storrs & Harrison Co. Cat. 1895. 

50 2. Storrs & Harrison Co. Cat. 1910. 

BBS. Stubbs, W. C. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 36:1247. 1895. 

504. Stumpp & Walter Co. Cat. 1924. 

,-»<r. Stumpp & Walter Co. Cat. 1928. 

506. Stumpp & Walter Co. Cat. 1932. 

507. Sturtevant, E. L. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1884:160-188. 

508. Sturtevant, E. L. U. S. D. A. Bui. 57:91-101. 1899. 

509. Taft, L. R. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 57:37, 38. 1890. 

510. Taft, L. R. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 70:10-12. 1891. 

511. Taft, L. R., and Gladden, H. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

79:20. 1892. 

512. Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Coryell, R. J. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 90:9-10. 1893. 

513. Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Hedrick, U. P. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 120:25. 1895. 
.". 1 1. Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Bui. 144:1897. 
513. Taft, L. R., and Gladden, H. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

170:1899. 

516. Taft, L. R., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 190: 

128-129. 1901. 

517. Taft, L. R., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 196: 

99-100. 1902. 

518. Taft, L. R., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 209: 

108-109. 1903. 

519. Tait, Geo., & Sons Cat. 1913. 

520. Tait, Geo., & Sons Cat. 1918. 

521. Tait, Geo., & Sons Cat. 1922. 

522. Tait, Geo., & Sons Cat. 1926. 
52.'!. Templin, L., Seed Co. Cat. 1906. 

521. The Cultivator (new series) 8:57. 1851. 

525. Thompson, H. C. Vegetable Crops 447^19. McGraw-Hill. 

1923. 

526. Thorbum, J. M., & Co. Cat. 1861. 

527. Thorburn, J. M., & Co. Cat. 1896. 

528. Thorburn, J. M., & Co. Cat. 1897. 

529. Thorburn, J. M., & Co. Cat. 1908. 

530. Thorbum, J. M., & Co. Cat. 1910. 

531. Thorburn, J. M., & Co. Cat. 1911. 

532. Tracy, W. W., Jr. Mich. Hoit. Soc. 277. 1885. 

533. Tracy, W. W., Jr. U. S. D. A. Bur. PI. Ind. Bui. 21 : 151-164. 

1903. 



534. 
535. 
536. 
537. 
538. 
539. 
540. 
541. 
542. 
543. 
544. 

545. 
546. 

517. 
518. 
549. 
530. 
551. 



533. 

534. 
535. 
536. 
557. 
558. 
559. 
560. 
561. 
362. 
363. 
364. 
565. 
366. 
567. 
568. 
569. 
570. 
571. 
572. 
573. 
571. 



Trivett's Seed Co. Cat. 1932. 
Troop. J. Ind. Agr. Exp. Sta. 
Troop, J. Ind. Agr. Exp. Sta. 
Troop, J. Ind. Agr. Exp. Sta. 
Troop, J. Ind. Agr. Exp. Sta. 
U. S. D. A. Ann. Rpt. 446. 
U. S. D. A. Ann. Rpt. 121. 



Bui. 18:7. 1889. 

Bui. 31:1890. 

Bui. 34: 77-78. 1891. 
. Bui. 38:21. 1892. 
1845. 
1859. 



Vaughan Seed Store Cat. 1910. 

Vicks, Jas., & Sons Cat. 1916. 

Vicks, Jas., & Sons Cat. 1920. 

Vilmorin-Andrieux, Les Plantes Potageres 326-327. 1883. 

Vilmorin-Andrieux, Paris. 
Watts, R. L. Tenn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 2:No. 1:22. 1892. 
Watts, R. L. Vegetable Gardening 430-431. Orange Judd. 

1922. 
Weeber & Don Cat. 1918. 
Weil, H. M.. Seed Co. Cat. 1914. 
Wenholz, H. Agr. Gaz. N. S. Wales 31:552. 1920. 
Western Seed Co. Cat. 1927. 
Western Seed Co. Cat. 1929. 
White, W. N. Gardening for the South 216. Orange Judd. 

1868. 
Will, G. F., and Hyde, G. E. Corn Among the Indians of the 

Upper Missouri. W. H. Miner Co., St. Louis. 1917. 
Will, O. H., & Co. Cat. 1892. 
Will, O. H., & Co. Cat. 1907. 
Will, O. H., & Co. Cat. 1913. 
Will, O. H., & Co. Cat. 1920. 
Will, O. H., & Co. Cat. 1924. 
Will, O. H., & Co. Cat. 1927. 
Wilson, G. H., Cat. 1932. 
Wood, T. W., & Sons Cat. 1895. 

Woodbury, C. G. The Canner Conv. 56:166. 1923. 
Woodruff, F. H., & Sons Cat. 1923. 
Woodruff, F. H., & Sons Cat. 1927. 
Woodruff, F. H., & Sons Cat. 1929. 
Woodruff, F. H., & Sons Cat. 1931. 
Woodruff, S. D., & Sons Cat. 1898. 
Woodruff, S. D., & Sons Cat. 1907. 
Wyatt & Sons Co. Cat. 1931. 

Yeager, A. F. N. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 205:1927. 
Yeager, A. F. N. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 233:80. 1930. 
Yopp Seed Co. Cat. 1926. 
Young, C, & Son Cat. 1922. 
Young, Josiah, Cat. 1907. 



INDEX 



Abbott and Cobb, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 18 
Acker. H. E., 29 

Aggeler & Musser Seed Co., Los Angeles, Calif., 74 
Albertson, M. A., Nutley, N. J., Var. orig. by, 29 
Alefeld, F., on Maize classification, 5, 12 
Allen, R. H. & Co.. seedsmen, New York City, N. Y., 66 
Allen. Sterling and Lathrop, seedsmen, Portland, Me., 49 
Andropogoneae. 9 

Anthony, Henry C, Newport, R. I.. 8, 27, 61 ; Var. orig. by, 20, 79 
Aspinwall, Wm. F., Loudonville, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 63 
Associated Seed Growers, New Haven, Conn., 14, 62; Var. intr. by, 
66, 79 

B 

Bagnal, Lieut. Richard, 6, 57 

Barden, C. A., Oberlin, Ohio, 8; Var. orig. by, 77, 88 

Beardsley, C. W. Milford, Conn., Var. orig. by, 43 

Beckert Seed Store, Pittsburg, Pa., Var. intr. by, 32, 71 

Bell, J. J., seedsman, Windsor, N. Y., 44 

Bement, C. N., 7, 57 

Blumenbachia, Koel. Descr. Gram. 28. 1802, 9 

Bolgiano, F. W. & Co., seedsmen, Washington, D. C, Var. intr. by, 

32 
Bolgiano, J. Seed Co., Baltimore, Md., 64; Var. intr. by, 74 
Bonafous, M. on Maize classification, 5, 12, 92 
Boynton, Var. orig. by, 32 

Brackett, C. N., Newton, Mass., Var. orig. by, 63 
Breck, Joseph, seedsman, Boston, Mass., 66, 80, 82, 92; Var. intr. 

by, 34, 50, 81, 86 
Bridgeman, Thomas, 6, 40 
Briggs, Newton, Mass., Var. orig. by, 86 
Broom com, 9 

Browning, Lake Waccabuck, New York, Var. orig. by, 50 
Buckbee, H. W. & Co., seedsmen, Rockford, 111., 38; Var. intr. by, 21 
Buist, Robert, seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 7, 66 
Bunger, Fred, Var. orig. by, 33 
Burbank, E. W., Var. orig. by, 24 
Burbank, Luther, plant breeder and selector, Santa Rosa, Calif., 

8; Var. orig. by, 72 
Burgess Seed & Plant Co., Galesburg, Mich., Var. intr. by, 37 
Burpee, W. Atlee Co., seedsmen, Doylestown and Philadelphia, Pa., 

16, 72; Var. intr. by, 19, 23, 25, 28, 30, 34, 40, 44, 53, 63, 64, 65, 

69, 76, 77, 87 
Burr, Fearing Jr., 7, 8. 17, 22, 24, 30, 56, 62, 83, 89, 92, 94 
Burrell, D. V., seedsman, Rocky Ford, Colo., 93 
Burrill, T. J., 16, 61, 68 



Carleton, M. A., 47 

Cassel Seed Store, Lansdale, Pa., Var. intr. by, 41 

Charlton, William, 24 

Chicken corn, 9 

Childs, John Lewis, seedsman. Floral Park, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 25, 

44, 62, 68, 76 
Clark, C. S. & Sons, seedsmen, Wakeman, Ohio, 64; Var. intr. by, 

77, 88 
Clark, C. S., seedsman, Wakeman, Ohio, 8; Var. orig. by, 55, 69 
Clark, Everett B., seedsman, Milford, Conn., 8; Var. orig. by, 25, 

28, 53 
Clark, E. B. Seed Co.. Milford, Conn., Var. intr. by, 49, 78 
Clark, Frederick B., corn breeder; Var. orig. by, 71 
Classification, basis of, 16 
Classification and Keys, discussion of, 15, 16 
Columbus, on discovery of com, 4 
Comstock. Ferre & Co., seedsmen, Wethersfield, Conn., 39, 44; Var. 

intr. by, 84 
Condon Bros., seedsmen, Rockford, 111., Var. intr. by, 26 
Conn. Agr. Exp. Sta., New Haven, Conn., Var. orig. by, 62, 86 
Coolidge, Charles, Phelps, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 71 
Com: 

Dent, 12, 89 

Dwarf forms, 13 

Endosperm forms, 12 

Flint, 12, 89 

Flour, 89 

Fossil, 3, 13 

General Morphology, 10 

Hybrid forms, 10, 13 

Indian, varieties of, 6 

Legends of, 3 

Pod, 13 

Polysperm forms, 13 



Pop, 13 

Pre-Columbian records, 4 

Rasmose forms, 13 

Soft, 13 

Sweet, 13 

Synonymy of, 12 

Theories of origin, 3 

Variegated-leaved forms, 13 
Cornell University, Ithaca, N. Y., 14 
Cory, William, Market gardener, 8; Var. orig. by, 27 
Coy, E. L., Washington Co., N. Y., 77 
Crosby, Josiah, Arlington, Mass., 8; Var. orig. by, 23, 28 
Crossman, Calvin, New Milford, Conn., 37 
Cummings, G. H., 37, 69 
Cummings, H. C, 68 
Curtis & Cobb, seedsmen, 84 

D 

Dacty lodes, Zanoni-Monti ex Kuntze, Rev. Gen. PI. 2: 772. 1891, 9 

Dallwig, W. E., seedsman, Milwaukee, Wis., 21 

Darling &. Beaham, seedsmen, Petoskey, Mich., 69 

Darling, Noyes, 8; Var. orig. by, 30 

Darwin, Charles, discoveries of ancient corn, 3 

Data, sources of, 14, 16 

Davis, M. B., 71 

De Graw, Hamilton, New York City, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 53 

De Lue, Dr. F. S., Needham, Mass., 8; Var. orig. by, 81 

De Wolfe, M. J., Var. orig. by, 18 

Dexter Asylum, Providence, R. I., Var. intr. by, 20 

Di Giorgi Bros., Council Bluffs, Iowa, Var. intr. by, 63 

Dow, George, Var. orig. by, 33 

Drake, A. H., East Brookfield, Mass., Var. orig. by, 73 

Dreer, Henry A., seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 63, 80. Var. intr. by, 

19, 20, 55, 79 
Dunning, James A., Var. intr. by, 20 
Dunning, R. B. & Co., Bangor, Me., 20, 84 
Durkee, Thomas C, West Peabody, Mass., Var. orig. by, 31 
Durra, 9 



Eastman, Var. orig. by, 39 

Eastman Seed Co., East Sumner, Me., Var. intr. by, 39 
Ebeling, F. H., seedsman, Syracuse, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 71 
Emerson, Thos. W. Co., Boston, Mass., Var. intr. by, 74, 82 
Euchlaena Schrad. Ind. Sem. Hort. Goett. 1832, 9, 10 

Mexicana Schrad. 10 

Perennis Hitchc. 10 
Everitt, James A., seedsman, Indianapolis, Ind., Var. intr. by, 45, 54 
Evolution of Varieties, 18 



Falconer, Wm., 55 

Farquhar, R. & J. & Co., seedsmen, Boston, Mass., Var. intr. by, 25 

Ferry, D. M. & Co., Detroit, Mich., 55, 61; Var. intr. by, 19, 21, 

32, 33, 38, 39, 43, 46, 48, 69, 73 
Ferry-Morse Seed Co., Detroit, Mich., 14 
Feterita, 9 

Field, Henry Seed Co., Shenandoah, Iowa, 68; Var. intr. by, 37, 93 
Fiske Seed Co., Boston, Mass., 66 
Forbes, Alexander & Co., seedsmen, Newark, N. J., 52, 54, 66; Var. 

intr. by, 41 
Ford Seed Co., Ravenna, Ohio, Var. intr. by, 38, 42, 53, 60, 68 
Fottler, Fiske & Rawson, seedsmen, Boston, Mass., 66, 80; Var. 

intr. by, 42 
Freeman, G. F., plant breeder, Ariz. Exp. Sta., Tucson, Ariz., Var. 

orig. by, 85 



Gama grass, 9, 10 

General notes, 14 

Germaine Seed & Plant Co., Los Angeles, Calif., 67 

Gill Bros., seedsmen, Portland, Ore., Var. intr. by, 36, 59, 80 

Gilman, Minn., Var. orig. by, 42 

Glossary of Terms, 1 7 

Gould, L. R. & Co., seedsmen, St. Paul, Minn., 84 

Gould, Thomas, Ventura, Calif., Var. orig. by, 79 

Gramineae, 9 

Gregory, J. J. H. & Sons, Marblehead, Mass., 8, 36, 59, 60, 61, 62, 

70; Var. intr. by, 18, 22, 27, 28, 31, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 46, 48, 49, 

53, 61, 69, 75, 76, 81, 83, 91 
Grey, Thos., Co., seedsmen, Boston, Mass., 74 
Griswold, Thos. & Co., seedsmen, South Wethersfield, Conn., Var. 

intr. by, 40 
Gumey Seed & Nursery Co., Yankton, S. D., Var. intr. by, 18, 74 



101 



102 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



H 

Halstead, Prof. Byron D., New Jersey Exp. Station, New Brunswick, 

N. J., 16; Var. orig. by, 68 
Hansen, Prof. N. E., South Dakota State College, Brookings, S. D., 

Var. intr. by, 47 
Hanson, P. G., Var. orig. by, 61 
Harris, — , Var. orig. by, 21 
Harris, Joseph Co., seedsmen, Coldwater, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 51, 

59, 68, 73, 88 
Harris, Wm. K., Philadelphia, Pa., Var. orig. by, 30 
Hart, Chas. C, seedsman, Wethersfield, Conn., Var. intr. by, 37, 47 
Henderson, Peter & Co., seedsman, New York City, 59, 63; Var. 

intr. by, 28, 29, 43, 50, 59, 64, 83; See Golden Cream, 79 
Hendry, G. W., origin of sweet corn, 5 

Hoffman, Dr. Herbert, Merchantville, N. J., Var. orig. by, 30, 86 
Holcus, L. Sp. PI. 1047. 1753. 9 
Holmes, Robert, Anoka, Minn., Var. orig. by, 35 
Holmes Seed Co., Harrisburg, Pa., later Canton, Ohio, Var. intr. 

by, 30, 60, 67 
Hoskins, T. H., Newport, Vermont, 33 
Hovey & Co., seedsmen, Boston, Mass., 62, 66, 77, 84; Var. intr. 

by, 30 
Hunn, C. E.. 54 

Hunnewell, H. Hollis, Wellesley, Mass., 21 
Hunt, William M. & Co., seedsmen, New York City, 44 
Hybrid-inbred, discussion of, 8 
Hyde, Var. orig. by, 39 



Ihrig, Var. orig. by, 55 

Immer & Son Seed Co., Moscow, Russia, 47 

Indian Corn, 17 

Iowa Seed Co., Des Moines, Iowa., Var. intr. by, 38, 42, 58 

Isbell, S. M. & Co., Jackson, Mich., 21; Var. intr. by, 33, 54 



Johnson & Musser Seed Co., Los Angeles, Calif., Var. intr. by, 56 
Johnson & Stokes, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 23, 

32, 42, 64, 90 
Johnson grass, 9 

Johnson Seed Co., Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 27, 41 
Johnson, H. W., 41 
Jones, D. F., plant breeder, Conn. Agr. Exp. Sta., New Haven, 

Conn., 8, 40, 62; Var. orig. by, 79 
Jones Seed Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., Var. intr. by, 36 
Judd, Orange, 20 
Jung, J. W. Seed Co., Randolph, Wis., 34 

K 

Kafir-corn, 9 

Kaoliang, 9 

Keller, C. D., market gardener, Toledo, Ohio, Var. orig. by, 44 

Kendall & Whitney, seedsmen, Portland, Maine, 66 

Kendel, A. O, seedsman, Cleveland, Ohio, 8; Var. intr. by, 39, 46 

Kessler, W. W., Madison, Ind., Var. orig. by, 54 

Kevitt, T. C, Athenia, N. J., Var. orig. by, 23 

Kilgore Seed Co., Plant City, Fla., Var. intr. by, 76, 93 

Kornicke, F., on maize classification, 12, 15 



Lackey, — , Marblehead, Mass., Var. orig. by, 46 

Landreth, D. & Sons, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 35, 

90 
Landreth, D. Seed Co., Bristol, Pa., 16; Var. intr. by, 46, 51, 70, 83 
Lawrence, Rev. J. Reynolds, North Middleboro, Mass., 81 
Leonard Seed Co., Chicago, 111., Var. intr. by, 53 
Lindholm, C. J., Minneapolis, Minn., Var. intr. by, 33, 70, 75, 78, 82 
Livingston's, A. W. & Sons, seedsmen, Columbus, Ohio, Var. 

intr. by, 23, 26, 43, 62, 65, 76 
Livingston Seed Co., Columbus, Ohio, Var. intr. by, 24, 38 
Logsdail, Arthur, J., 35, 58, 67 

Lord, James E., Stonington, Conn., Var. orig. by, 77 
Low, Aaron, 33 
Lyman, D. A., Columbus, Conn., Var. orig. by, 47 

M 
Macoun, Dr. W. T., Central Exp. Farms, Ottawa, Can., 35 
Mai's Adans. Fam. 2:39. 1763, 10 
Maize, key to important allies of, 9 

Hybrids with gama grass, 10 

Hybrids with teosinte, 10 

Morphology of, 10 

Spikelets of, 1 1 

Systematic Botany of, 9 
Mallett, M. H., seedsman. New Milford, Conn., 37 
Mandan Indians, see Nuetta, 85 



Mangelsdorf, P. C, Texas Exp. Sta., College Station, Texas, Var. 

orig. by, 91 
Manisuris, L. Mant. 2:164. 1771,9 
Mapes, Prof., Newark, N. J., 7, 66 
Marsh, — , Wethersfield, Conn., 37 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society, 81 

Massachusetts State College of Agriculture, Amherst, Mass., 14 
Maule, Wm. Henry, seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 26, 

40, 45, 49, 55 
Mays americana Baumg. Enum. Stirp. Transs. 3:281. 1840, 12 
Mays Gaertn. Fruct. 1:6. 1788, 10 
Mays vulgaris Ser. Mel. Bot. 2:182. 1819, 12 
Mays Zea Gaertn. Fruct. 1:6. 1788, 12 
Mayzea Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 1830,10 
Mayzea cerealis Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 1830, 12 
Mayzea cerealis var. gigantea Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 1830, 13 
Mayzea vestita Raf. Med. Fl. 2:241. 1830, 13 
McCluer, G. W., 16, 61, 68 

McCullough, J. Chas. Seed Co., Cincinnati, Ohio, 26 
McCullough's, J. M. Sons Co., seedsmen, Cincinnati, Ohio, Var. 

intr. by, 26, 54 
Meech, F. J., Charlevoix, Mich., Var. orig. by, 73 
Michael Seed Store, Sioux City, Iowa, 69 

Michell, Henry F., seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 44; Var. intr. by, 30 
Mills, H. S., plant breeder, Bristol, Pa., Var. orig. by, 70, 83 
Milo, 9 

Mimms, J. W., Coldwater, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 51 
Mogle, A. L., Wilkinson, Ind., Var. orig. by, 50 
Mohawk Valley Seed Co., Canajoharie, N. Y., 25 
Moody, William, Harrisburg, Pa., Var. orig. by, 60 
Moore and Simon, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 21, 33 
Moore, Capt. John B., Concord, Mass., 8; Var. orig. by, 52 
Moore Seed Co., Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 41 
Morris and Snow, seedsmen, Los Angeles, Calif., Var. intr. by, 22 
Morse, C. C. & Co., seedsmen, San Francisco, Calif., 36; Var. intr. 

by 18, 73, 79 
Muller, L. J., Gardener, Westbury, L. I., N. Y., Var. orig. by, 44 

N 

Neilsen, V. H., Council Bluffs, Iowa, Var. orig. by, 63 

Noll, J. F. & Co., Newark, N. J., 52; Var. intr. by, 54, 63 

Norsemen, as discoverers of corn, 4 

Northrup, Braslan & Goodwin Co., seedsmen, Minneapolis, Minn., 

Var. intr. by, 59, 70 
Northrup, King & Co., seedsmen, Minneapolis, Minn., Var. intr. 

by, 57, 84 
Note taking, discussion of, 14 



Olcott, Walter, South Manchester, Conn., 41 



Panicatae, 9 

Parker, A. C, 22 

Patent Office, 24 

Peart, G. S., Burlington, Ont., 27 

Perry, W. B., Cresco, Iowa, Var. orig. by, 19, 34 

Perry, A. D., seedsman, Syracuse, N. Y.. 25; Var. orig. by, 58 

Peters, Thos. A., Hampton, New Brunswick, Canada, 58 

Philips-Thompson Co., seedsmen, Wilmington, Del., 42 

Phillips, Henry, seedsman, Toledo, Ohio, Var. intr. by, 39 

Pickett, J. G., Greenfield, Mass., 77 

Pope, Rev. A. R., Somerville, Mass., 6; Var. orig. by, 56 

Potter, Thomas, 8, 60 

Preston, Isabella, Var. orig. by, 71 

Price and Knickerbocker, seedsmen, Albany, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 57 

Price, George H., seedsman, Albany, N. Y., 63; Var. intr. by, 60, 67 



Rane, Prof. F. William, New Hampshire State College, Durham, 

N. H., 21, 90 
Rawson, W. W., seedsman, Boston, Mass., 80; Var. intr. by, 21, 23 
Reuter Seed Co., New Orleans, La., 91 
Rice, J. B. Seed Co., Cambridge, N. Y., 14, 70 
Richie, Arthur L., Riverton, N. J., 8; Var. orig. by, 31, 66, 67 
Ritchie, T. F., Ottawa, Canada, 8, 71 
Roach Canning Co., Hart, Michigan, 36 
Robinson, J. C. Seed Co., Waterloo, Nebr., 16 
Rose, Alfred, Penn Yan, New York, 49 
Rottboellia. 9 



Saccharum L. Sp. PI. 54, 1753, 9 

officinarum L. 9 
Salisbury, J. H, 6, 15, 17, 32, 43, 66, 83, 89, 94 

Salzer, John A. Seed Co., La Crosse, Wis., 55; Var. intr. by, 44, 45 
Saunders, Albany, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 63 
Scattered corn, a Mandan, 6 
Schenck, P. A., 40 



INDEX 



103 



Seeds, representative types of maize, 25 

Seymour, H. J., Kenwood, N. Y., 8; Var. orig. by, 87 

Shallu, 9 

Shelton, George G., Nooksack, Wash., Var. orig. by, 72 

Sibley, Hiram, seedsman, Rochester, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 75 

Simon, I. N. & Co., seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., 52; Var. intr. by, 39 

Smith, G. M., U. S. D. A., Washington, D. C., 8 

Sorghum, Moench, Meth. 207, 1794. 9 

halapensis (L. I Pers. 9 

vulgare Pers. 9 
Sorgo, 9 

South Family, 63 

Stabler, Dr. Augustus, Var. orig. by, 62 

Stabler, Henry, Montgomery Co., Md., 8; Var. orig. by, 62, 65 
Stark Bros. Nursery Co., Louis'ana, Mo., Var. intr. by, 50, 65 
Steckler, J. Seed Co., New Orleans, La., 90; Var. intr. by, 37 
Steele, George S., Hudson, N. H., Var. orig. by, 74, 82 
Stewart, Andrew, Carmel Valley, Calif., Var. orig. by, 73 
Stokes, Francis C. & Co., Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 66, 67, 77 
Stokes Seed Farms Co., Moorestown, N. J., Var. intr. by, 35 
Stokes, Walter P. seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 65; Var. intr. by, 

31, 41 
Stover, E. R., New Jersey, Var. orig. by, 76 
Stowell, Nathan, Burlington, N. J., 8; Var. orig. by, 66 
Stumpp & Walter, seedsmen, New York city, Var. intr. by, 44, 50 
Sturtevant, E. L. on Maize classification, 5, 12, 14, 15, 16; varieties 

7, 17, 18, 22, 28, 40, 42, 46, 56, 60, 62, 68, 92 
Sudan grass, 9 
Sugar cane, 9 
Sweet corn, early history of, 5 

Supplementary list of varieties, 95 

White-kerneled varieties of, 1 7 

Yellow-kerneled varieties of, 70 



Taft. Prof. R. L., Michigan State College, East Lansing, Mich., 

54, 90 
Tait, George & Son, seedsmen, Norfolk, Va., 92; Var. intr. by, 92 
Templin Seed Co., Calla, Ohio, Var. intr. by, 81 
Teosinte, 4, 10 

Thalysia Kuntze Rev. Gen. 2:794. 1891, 10 
Thalysia Mays Kuntze Rev. Gen. 2:794. 1891, 12 
Thorburn, J. M. & Co., New York City, N. Y., 6, 59, 63, 66, 92; 

Var. intr. by, 20, 37, 50, 55, 63, 94 
Tinker, Rev. J. E., Rock Stream, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 25 
Tracy, S. N., 60 
Tripsaceae, 9 
Tripsacum L. Syst. Nat. ed. 10. 2:1261. 1759. 9 

dactyloides L., 10 
Tuscarora Indians, 92 

u 

Universal Exposition of 1904, St. Louis, Mo., 47 

V 

Van Fleet, Dr., Var. orig. by, 64 

Varieties, early introductions of, 1 7 

Varieties of other forms of maize, 89 
White-kerneled, 89 

Adams, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Adams Dreadnaught, Syn. of Large Adams, 91 

Adams Early, 111. 25, 90; Var. 89 

Adams Early Improved, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Adams Early White, 7; Syn. of Adams Early, 89; Var. 89 

Adams XX Early, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Baltimore, see Adams Early, 90 

Beverly, Syn. of Extra Early Beverly, 90 

Blands Extra Early, see Adams Early, 90 

Bloody Butcher, see Burpee, 72 

Bloomsdale Sugar, 95 

Bol Early, see Adams Early, 90 

Buck Mountain, see Burlington Hybrid, 90 

Burlington, see Adams Early, 89; Syn. of Extra Early 

Adams, 89 
Burlington Hybrid, 90 
Burlington Market, see Burlington Hybrid, 90 

Cuzco, see Early Southern Sweet, 38 

Delicious Cream, see Adams Early, 90 
Dreadnaught Ideal, Syn. of Large Adams, 91 

Earliest Table, Syn. of Extra Early Beverly, 90 
Early Beverly, Syn. of Extra Early Beverly, 90 
Early Burlington, see Adams Early, 89; Syn. Extra Early 

Adams, 89 
Early Burlington Hybrid, Syn. of Burlington Hybrid, 90 
Early Jefferson, see White Australian, 93 
Early Large Adams, Syn. of Large Adams, 91 



Early Morn, see Adams Early, 90 

Early Tuscarora, Syn. of Tuscarora, 92 

Extra Early Adams, 64, 90; see Adams Early, 90; Var. 89 

Extra Early Adams White, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Extra Early Baltimore, see Adams Early, 90 

Extra Early Beverly, 90 

Extra Early Dwarf Adams, see Adams Early, 89 

Fifty Day, see Burlington Hybrid, 90 
First Early Neck, see Extra Early Beverly, 90 
First Early Table, Syn. Extra Early Beverly, 90 
French Market, 90 

Gentry Early Market, see Large Adams, 91 

Hickory King, 111. 25; Var. 91 

Ideal, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Ideal Early, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Ideal Early Adams, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Ideal Extra Early, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 

Improved French Market, Syn. of French Market, 90 

Jefferson, see White Australian, 93 

Landreth Early Market, Syn. of Burlington Hybrid, 90 
Large Adams, see Adams Early, 89; Var. 91 
Large Early White Adams, Syn. of Large Adams, 91 
Large Tuscarora, Syn. of Tuscarora, 92 

Menomony, 66 
Mexican June, 91 

New Ideal, Syn. of Adams Early, 89 
Norfolk Market, 92 

Paducah Market, see Large Adams, 91 
Pennsylvania Rare Ripe, see White Australian, 93 

Second Early Adams, Syn. of Large Adams, 9 1 

Silver King, see Truckers Favorite, 92 

Sioux Squaw, 111. 25; Var. 92 

Sixty-five Day White Cob, see Adams Early, 90 

Southern Tuscarora, 21 

Truckers Favorite, 92 

Turkey Wheat, Syn. of Tuscarora, 92 

Tuscarora, 92 

Tuxpan, 93 

White Australian, 111., 25, 91; Var. 93 
White Squaw, 67 
Yellow-kemeled, 93 

Alaska Early, Syn. of Alaska Indian, 93 
Alaska Indian, 93 

Assiniboine, Syn. of Assiniboine Yellow, 93 
Assiniboine Yellow, 111. 25; Var. 93 

Bryant, 95 

Canada Yellow, 6; Syn. of Early Canada, 94 

Canada Flint, see Golden Sweet, 83 

Canadian Yellow Flint, Syn. of Early Canada, 94 

Cinquantino, see Spanish Gold, 86 

Common Yellow, see Golden Sweet, 83 

Early Bryant, Syn. of Bryant, 95 

Early Canada, 83; Var. 94 

Early Eight Rowed Canada, Syn. Early Canada, 94 

Forty Day Maize, see Spanish Gold, 86 

Howe's Alberta Flint, see Banting, 71 

King Phillip, 68 

Large 8-Rowed Yellow Flint, see Early Canada, 94 

Mais Quarantain, see Spanish Gold, 86 

Manhattan, 94 

Middle Sized 8-Rowed Yellow Flint, see Early Canada, 94 

New Alaska, Syn. of Alaska Indian, 93 
New England Yellow, see Burbank, 72 
Norwegian, see Early Canada, 94 



104 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Varieties, supplementary list of obscure, 95 
Varieties of sweet corn, 

N B Variety names set off by quotation marks, such as " Aspin- 
wall," were at one time used to designate distinct varieties, 
but later as synonyms of the varieties under discussion. 
White-kerneled, 17 

Abbott and Cobb's Early, 18 

Abolition, 18 

Abundance, Syn. of Branching, 23 

Acme, 18 

Acme Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Alameda, 36; Syn. of Alameda Sweet, 18 

Alameda Sweet, 18 

Albany, 19 

Albany Sugar, Syn. of Albany, 19 

Alexander Sugar, 95 

Aliens Choice, 95 

Alpha, 77; Var. 19 

Amazement, 95 

Amber Cream, 42; Var. 19 

Amber Cream Sweet, Syn. of Amber Cream, 19 

Amber Malakhoff, Syn. of Malakhoff, 47 

Aristocrat, 67; Var. 20 

Aroostock Early, 20 

" Aspinwall," used as a Syn. of Shakers, 63 

Astor, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

Asylum, 20 

Asylum Sugar, Syn. of Asylum, 20 

" Avon Evergreen," used as a Syn. of Stowell's Ever- 
green, 65 

Avon Evergreen, 21 

Ballard, Syn. of Chicago Market, 25 

Ballard's Early, Syn. of Chicago Market, 25 

Ballard's Extra Early, Syn. of Chicago Market, 25 

Ballard Red Cob, Syn. of Chicago Market, 25 

Baltimore Market, 21 

Banana, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 

Banana Cream, 21 

Bantam Crosby, Syn. of Midget, 50 

Bates Extra Early, 95; see Dwarf Early, 32 

Bearsfoot, 111. 20; Var. 21 

Beckert's Earliest Improved, see Earliest, 32 

Belle Isle, 21 

Best Double-Barrelled, Syn. of Double-Barrelled Best, 31 

Best of All, 111. 21; Var. 21. 

Big Four, 22 

Black Mexican, 6, 16, 25 50, 58, 68, 69, 72, 86; 111. 24, 25; 

Var. 22 
Black Mexican Sweet, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 
Black Sugar, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 
Black Sweet, 6, 7; Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 
Black Sweet Corn, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 
Blood Red Sweet, 95 
Blount's White Prolific, see Prolific, 61 
Bonanza, 23 
Bonk's Best, 95 

Boston, Syn. of Boston Market, 23 
Boston Market, 23 

" Boston Market," used as a Syn. of Crosby, 28 
Boynton, Syn. of Early Boynton Sweet, 32 
Boynton Early, Syn. of Early Boynton Sweet, 32 
Brainard Sugar, 95 
Branching, 23 
Breaky, J., 95 

Breck Premier, Syn. of Albany, 19 
Briggs Early Sweet, 19; Syn. of Eight-rowed, 40 
Brill's Early Dwarf Sugar, see Dwarf Early, 32 
Broad Grained, Syn. of Livingston's Broad Grained, 24 
Broad Grained, Livingston's, 111. 25; Var. 24 
Burbank Early, Syn. of Burbank Early Maine, 24 
Burbank Early Maine, 24 

Burbank Early White, Syn. of Burbank Early Maine, 24 
Burpee White Evergreen, see White Evergreen, 69 
Burr's Improved, 7, 52; Var. 24 
Burr's Improved Wrinkled Sweet Corn, see Burr's 

Improved, 24 
Burr's Large Sweet or Sugar, Syn. of Burr's Improved, 24 
Burr's Mammoth 63; Syn. of Burr's Improved, 24 
Burr's Mammoth Sugar, Syn. of Burr's Improved, 24 
Burr's New Sugar, Syn. of Burr's Improved, 24 
Burr's Sweet, Syn. of Burr's Improved, 24 
Burvis Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

California, 25 

California Sweet, Syn. of California, 25 

Cambridge Sweet, 95 

Campbell's Extra Early, 95 

Carter's Improved, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

Catawba, 16; Var. 111. 25, Var. 25 



Champion, 61 ; Var. 25 

Champion Early, Syn. of Champion, 25; see Columbia, 26 
Champion Sugar, Syn. of Champion, 25 
Chase, The, 25 

Chicago Early Market, Syn. of Chicago Market, 25 
Chicago Market, 25 

Childs Honey Dew, see Honey Dew, 44 
Chinese Early, Syn. of Honey Dew, 44 

Chinese Midget, see Honey Dew, 44; Syn. of Midget, 50 
Cincinnati Market, 111. 25; Var. 26 
Clark's Early Evergreen, see Early Evergreen, 33 
Clark's Early Nonesuch, Syn. of Nonesuch, 55 
Clark's Old Colony, see Old Colony, 56 
Cleveland's Colossal, 26 

Club Zig Zag, Syn. of Cincinnati Market, 26 
Club Zig Zag Evergreen, Syn. of Cincinnati Market, 26 
Colossal, Syn. of Cleveland's Colossal, 26 
Colossal Early, Syn. of Maule's Colossal Early, 26 
Colossal Early, Maule's, 26 

Colossal Extra Early, Syn. of Maule's Colossal Early, 26 
Columbia, 26 
Columbus Market, 26 
Concord, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 
Concord Bears-Foot, Syn. of Bearsfoot, 21 
Connecticut Beauty, 27 
Conqueror, Syn. of Potters Excelsior, 59 
Constantinople, 95 
Cook's Special, 27 
Cooper's Large Shoe Peg, 95 
Cory, 64; 111. 25; Var. 27 
Cory Sugar, Syn. of Cory, 27 
Cory Early Sugar, Syn. of Cory, 27 
Cosmopolitan, 28 

Country Gentleman, 11, 63, 67, 68, 79, 91; 111. 25; Var. 28 
Country Gentleman Hybrid, 8 
Crawford, 95 

Creedmoor, Syn. of Hickox, 43 
Crosby, 52, 79, 86; 111. 25, 30; Var. 28 
Crosby Dwarf Sugar, Syn. of Crosby, 28 
Crosby Early Dwarf, Syn. of Crosby, 28 
Crosby's Early Sugar, Syn. of Crosby, 28 
" Crosby's Early Sugar," used as a Syn. of Boston Mar- 
ket, 23 
Crosby Early 12-Row, Syn. of Crosby, 28 
" Crosby Extra Early," used as a Syn. of Boston Market, 23 
Crosgreen, 8 

Crosman's Genesee, Syn. of Genesee, 42 
Cross, 95 
Cupid, 29 

Dakota, Syn. of Early Dakota, 32 

Darling, Syn. of Darling's Early, 29 

Darling's Early, 7, 83, 84,; Var. 29 

Darling's Sugar, Syn. of Darling's Early, 29 

Dawn, Syn. of Early Dawn, 32 

Daybreak, Syn. of New Early Daybreak, 95 

Delicious, 30 

Delicious, Burpee, 30 

Des Moines, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Dessert, 95 

De Wolfe's Early Acme, Syn. of Acme, 18 

" De Wolf's Early Acme," used as a Syn. of Stowell's 

Evergreen, 65 
Diamond S., see Early Dakota, 32 
Dighton, 77; 111. 25; Var. 31 

Dobbin's Early Evergreen, see Early Evergreen, 33 
Dolly Dutton, 31 
Double-Barrelled Best, 31 
Dow's Extra Early, Syn. of Early Dow, 33 
Dreers, Syn. of Extra Ea. Dreers, 95 
Dreer's Best, 95 
Dugan's Sweet, 95 
Durkee, 31 

Durkee Sweet, Syn. of Durkee, 31 
Dutton, Syn. of Dolly Dutton, 31 
Dwarf Early, 32 
Dwarf Prolific Sugar, Syn. of Prolific, 61 

Earle's Early Evergreen, see Early Evergreen, 33 

Earliest, 32 

Earliest Catawba, Syn. of Catawba, 25 

Earliest Ever, Syn. of Vanguard, 67 

Earliest Large, Syn. of Eight-Rowed 40 

Earliest Mayflower, Syn. of Mayflower, 49 

Earliest Nordheim, Syn. of Nordheim, 55 

Earliest of All, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Earliest Rockford Market, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Earliest Sheffield, Syn. of Sheffield, 64 

Early, 95 

Early Acme, Syn. of Acme, 18 






INDEX 



105 



Early Alameda, Syn. of Alameda Sweet, 18 

Early Alexander, Syn. of Alexander Sugar, 95 

Early Aviator, 32 

Early Bonanza, Syn. of Bonanza, 23 

Early Boston Market, Syn. of Boston Market, 23 

Early Boynton Sweet, 32 

Early Buffalo, Syn. of Dighton, 31 

Early Butler, 95 

Early Butternut, Syn. of Howling Mob, 44 

Early Butternut Sugar, Syn. of Howling Mob, 44 

Early Cape May, 95 

Early Chance, 95 

Early Columbia, Syn. of Columbia, 26 

Early Concord, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 

Early Concord Sugar, Syn. of Moore*s Concord, 52 

Early Conqueror, Syn. of Potters Excelsior, 59 

Early Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Early Cosmopolitan, Syn. of Cosmopolitan, 28 

Early Crosby, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Early Dakota, 32 

Early Dawn, 40; Var. 32, 33 

Early Daybreak, Syn. of New Early Daybreak, 95 

Early Dean, 33 

Early Denver, 33 

Early Des Moines, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Early Dighton, Syn. of Dighton, 31 

Early Dobson's Evergreen, 95 

Early Dow, 33 

Early Dutton, Syn. of Dolly Dutton, 31 

Early Dwarf Narragansett, Syn. of Narragansett, 52 

Early Dwarf Sugar, Syn. of Dwarf Early, 32 

Early Egyptian, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

Early Eight-Rowed, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

Early Eight-Rowed Sugar, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

Early Eight Weeks, 95 

Early Essex, 33 

Early Evergreen, 74; 111. 25; Var. 33 

Early Excelsior, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Early Express, 95 

Early Fordhook, 34 

Early Fortune, 34 

Early Gem, 95 

Early Giant, Syn. of Kendel's Early Giant, 46; Improved 

Giant, 45 
Early Giant Sweet, Syn. of Kendel's Early Giant, 46 
Early Giant Wonder, 95 
Early Goose, 95 
Early Hampshire, 34 

Early Harvester, Syn. of Early Fortune, 34 
Early Honey Cream, 95 
Early Honeysuckle, Syn. of Surprise, 66 
Early Howling Mob, Syn. of Howling Mob, 44 
Early Iowa, 19; Var. 34 

Early Improved Dakota, Syn. of Early Dakota, 32 
Early Improved Dwarf Alameda, Syn. of Alameda Sweet, 18 
Early Indiana, Syn. of Indiana Wonder, 45 
Early Irondequoit, 95 
Early July, Syn. of Early June, 35 
Early June, 35 

Early Large Eight-Rowed, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 
Early Leach, 35 
Early Longfellow, 95 

Early Maine, Syn. of Burbank Early Maine, 24 
Early Malakhoff, 35, 67; Syn. of Malakhoff, 47 
Early Malcolm, 35 
Early Mammoth, 18, 90; Var. 35 

Early Mammoth Sugar, Syn. of Early Mammoth, 35 
Early Mammoth White Cory, Syn. of Mammoth White 

Cory, 48 
Early Maple Sugar, Syn. of Maple Sugar, 95 
Early Marblehead, Syn. of Marblehead, 49 
Early Market, 87; 111. 25, 31; Var. 36 
Early Marvel, 95 

Early Mayflower, Syn. of Mayflower, 49 
Early Metropolitan, Syn. of Metropolitan, 50 
Early Mexican Sweet, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 
Early Michigan, 36 
Early Minnesota, 42, 72; Var. 36 
Early Monarch, 95 

Early Moore's Concord, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 
Early Moore's Concord Sweet, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 
Early Morning Dew, Syn. of Morning Dew, 52 
Early Narragansett, 49; Syn. of Narragansett, 52 
Early Nordheim, Syn. of Nordheim, 55 
Early Norfolk, 95 

Early Old Colony, Syn. of Old Colony, 56 
Early Oregon Evergreen, Syn. of Oregon Evergreen, 56 
Early Page, 95 
Early Pearl, 37 
Early Pickaninny, Syn. of Pickaninny, 58 



Early Portland Market, Syn. of Portland Market, 59 

Early Pratt, see Chicago Market, 25 

Early Premo, Syn. of Premo, 60 

Early Red Cob, Syn. of Red Cob Sweet, 62 

Early Red Cob Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Early Red Cob Evergreen, Syn. of Red Cob Evergreen, 62 

Early Red Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Early Red Marblehead, Syn. of Marblehead, 49 

Early Red Narragansett, Syn. of Narragansett, 52 

Early Reliance, 95 

Early Rockford Market, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Early Rose, 37 

Early Russell's Prolific, see Prolific, 61 

Early Saskatchewan, 37 

Early Sensational, 95 

Early Sheffield, Syn. of Sheffield, 64 

Early Snowflake, Syn. of New Snowflake, 54 

Early Southern, Syn. of Early Southern Sweet, 38 

Early Southern Sweet, 38 

Early Sugar, 7; Syn. of Early Sweet, 38 

" Early Sugar," Syn. of Early Sugar, Livingston's, 38 

Early Sugar, Livingston's, 38 

Early Sunrise, 38 

Early Surprise, Syn. of Surprise, 66 

Early Sweet, 38 

Early Sweet Dwarf, Syn. of Dwarf Early, 32 

Early Sweet Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Early Sweet Jack Frost, Syn. of Jack Frost, 95 

Early Sweet Minnesota, Syn. of Early Minnesota, 36 

Early Tom Thumb, Syn. of Tom Thumb, 67 

Early Vacaville, Syn. of White Mexican, 69 

Early Vermont, 38 

Early White, Syn. of Delicious, Burpee, 30; see Dwarf 
Early, 32 

Early White Cob, Syn. of White Cob, 95 

Early White Cob Marblehead, Syn. of White Cob Marble- 
head, 69 

Early White Cory, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

Early White Evergreen, Syn. of White Evergreen, 69 

Early White Market, 80; Syn. of Early Market, 36 

Early White Mexican, Syn. of White Mexican, 69 

Early White Wonder, see Early Wonder, 39 

Early Windsor, 95 

Early Wonder, 88; Var. 39 

" Early Wonder-Woodruff," used as a Syn. of Dighton, 31 

Early XXX, 95 

Early Yankee, 95 

Eastern Extra Early, Syn. of Eastman's Early, 39 

Eastman's Early, 39 

Eastwick, 95 

Eclipse, 95 

Egyptian, 68; Var. 39 

Egyptian Sugar, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

Egyptian Sweet, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

Eight-Rowed, 40 

Eight-rowed Sugar, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

80-Day Monarch, Syn. of Early Monarch, 95 

Electric, 95 

Epicure, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 

Eruda, 95 

Essex Sweet Early, Syn. of Early Essex, 33 

Eureka, 95 

Eureka Early, Syn. of Eureka, 95 

Everbearing, 40 

" Everbearing," used as a Syn. of Howling Mob, 44 

Evergreen, 67, 84; Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Excelsior, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Excelsior Sugar, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Excelsior Sweet, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Extra Early, 95 

Extra Early Aristocrat, Syn. of Aristocrat, 20 

Extra Early Black Mexican, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 

Extra Early Bonanza, Syn. of Bonanza, 23 

Extra Early Columbia, Syn. of Columbia, 26 

Extra Early Concord Sugar, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 

Extra Early Cory, 33; Syn. of Cory, 27 

Extra Early Crosby, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Extra Early Dawn, 40 

Extra Early Dighton, Syn. of Dighton, 31 

Extra Early Dreer's, 95 

Extra Early Dwarf, Syn. of Dwarf Early, 32 

Extra Early Dwarf Sugar, Syn. of Dwarf Early, 32 

Extra Early Evergreen, Syn. of Early Evergreen, 33 

Extra Early Express, Syn. of Early Express, 95 

Extra Early Fortune, Syn. of Early Fortune, 34 

Extra Early Goose, Syn. of Early Goose, 95; see Early 
Golden Wonder, 75 

Extra Early Harvester, Syn. of Early Fortune, 34 

Extra Early Independence, 95 

Extra Early Manitowoc, Syn. of Manitowoc, 95 



106 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Extra Early Marblehead, Syn. of Marblehead, 49; Syn. 

of White Cob Marblehead, 69 
Extra Early Market, Syn. of Early Market, 36 
Extra Early Mayflower, Syn. of Mayflower, 49 
Extra Early Minnesota, Syn. of Early Minnesota, 36 
Extra Early Narragansett, Syn. of Narragansett, 52 
Extra Early Narragansett Sugar, Syn. of Narragansett, 52 
Extra Early Nordheim, Syn. of Nordheim, 55 
Extra Early Page, Syn. of Early Page, 95 
Extra Early Pearl, Syn. of Hartner's Early Pearl, 95 
Extra Early Pocohontas, see Pocohontas, 59 
Extra Early Premo, Syn. of Premo, 60 
Extra Early Purity, 95 
Extra Early Red Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 
Extra Early Sugar, see Dwarf Early, 32 
Extra Early Surprise, Syn. of Surprise, 66 
Extra Early Tom Thumb, Syn. of Tom Thumb, 67 
Extra Early Vermont, Syn. of Early Vermont, 38 
Extra Early White Cory, Syn. of White Cory, 69 
Extra Early White Marblehead, Syn. of White Cob Marble- 
head, 69 
Extra Early Wonder, Syn. of Early Wonder, 39 
Extra Extra Early, 95 

Fancy Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Farm Club, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Farmers' Club, 40 

Farmers' Club Sweet, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Farquhar Early, 95 

Favorite, 41 

Ferry's Early Evergreen, see Early Evergreen, 33 

First and Best, 95 

First Crop, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

First Crop Reliance, Syn. of Early Reliance, 95 

First Crop Sugar, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

First Early, 95 

Firstin, Syn. of Early Fordhook, 34 

First in Market, 95 

First in the Market Sugar, see Early Rose, 37 

First of All, Syn. of Cory, 27 

First Prize, 41 

Five Eared Sugar, 41 

Floracroft Beauty, 66; Var. 41 

Forbes Early, Syn. of New Early, 54 

Forbes New Early, Syn. of New Early, 54 

Fordhook, Syn. of Early Fordhook, 34 

Ford's, Syn. of Ford's Early, 42 

Ford's Early, 42 

Ford's Early Sweet, Syn. of Ford's Early, 42 

Fottler's Early, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Fourth of July, Syn. of Independence, 45 

French Honey, 67, 95 

Garwood, 95 

Genesee, 42 

Genesee Early, Syn. of Genesee, 42 

Genesee Early Sugar, Syn. of Genesee, 42 

General Grant, 95 

Giant, Syn. of Improved Giant, 45 

" Giant," used as a Syn. of Kendel's Early Giant, 46 

Giddings, 95 

Gold Coin Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Government Corn, see Double-Barrelled Best, 31 

Governor Gilman, 42 

Granite State, 42 

Green Cross, 8 

Grey's Perfection, see Perfection, 57 

Guarantee, 42 

Hammond's Best, 95 
Hance's Early, 43 

Harbinger White Marblehead, Syn. of White Cob Marble- 
head, 69 
Harmon, 95 
Harris Extra Early, 95 
Harris Sweet, Syn. of Crosby, 28 
Hartner's Early Pearl, 95 
Harveys Early, 95 
Hasting's Prolific, see Prolific, 61 

Havenstein's Early Cape May, Syn. of Early Cape May, 95 
Hawaii, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 
Heath's Early, 95 
Hematite Sweet, 6, 15; Var. 43 
Henderson, 43 
Henderson's Sugar, 95 
Hiawatha, 43 

Hickman's Extra Early Three-Ear, 95 
Hickox, 43 

Hickox Canner, Syn. of Hickox, 43 
Hickox Canning, Syn. of Hickox, 43 



Hickox Hybrid, 95 

Hickox Improved, Syn. of Hickox, 43 

Hickox Improved Sugar, Syn. of Hickox, 43 

Holmes' Delicious, see Delicious, 30 

Holmes' Premo, Syn. of Premo, 60 

Honey, 44 

Honey Boy, 44 

Honey Dew, 44 

Honey June, 95; see Mexican June, 91 

Honey Sweet, Syn. of Honey, 44 

Horsford's Little Giant, 95 

Howard's Perfection, see Perfection, 57 

Howling Mob, 61, 66, 81; Var. 44 

Hunts White Prolific, see Prolific, 61 

Hydes Earliest Sugar, 95 

Hydes Egyptian, see Egyptian, 39 

Imitation, Syn. of First in Market, 95 
Improved Black Mexican, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 
Improved Country Gentleman, Syn. of Country Gentle- 
man, 28 
Improved Early Champion, Syn. of Champion, 25 
Improved Early Giant, Syn. of Improved Giant, 45 
Improved Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 
Improved Extra Early White, see Dwarf Early, 32 
Improved Giant, 45 

Improved Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 
Improved Metropolitan, Syn. of Metropolitan, 50 
Improved Narrow Grain Evergreen, Syn. of Narrow 

Grained Evergreen, 53 
Improved Ne Plus Ultra, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 
Improved Peep O'Day, Syn. of Peep O'Day, 57 
Improved Ruby, Syn. of Ruby, 63 

Improved Stowell's Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Ever- 
green, 65 
Improved Triumph, Syn. of Triumph, 67 
Independence, 45 
Indiana Wonder, 45, 95 
Ihrig's Nordheim, Syn. of Nordheim, 55 
Iroquois Sweet Puckered, 6 
Isbell's Prolific, see Prolific, 61 



Jack Frost, 95 

Judson's Branching Sugar, see Branching, 

June Market, 95 

June 21st, Syn. of Burbank Early Maine, 



23 



24 



Kelly's Hybrid, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Kendel's Early Giant, 18; Var. 46 

Kendel's Early Market, 95 

Kendel's Early White Wonder, Syn. of White Wonder, 95 

Kendel's Giant, Syn. of Kendel's Early Giant, 46 

Kendel's New Early Giant, Syn. of Kendel's Early Giant, 46 

Kendel's New Large Early Giant, Syn. of Kendel's Early 

Giant, 46 
Keystone Wonder, 95 
King of The Earlies, 95 
Kloochman, 95 
Krein-Bring, 95 

Lackey, Syn. of Lackey's Early, 46 

Lackey's Early, 46 

Lackey's Early Sweet, Syn. of Lackey's Early, 46 

Lackey's New Early, Syn. of Lackey's Early, 46 

La Crosse Early, Syn. of Cory, 27 

La Crosse Sweet, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Lakeview Early Market, Syn. of Mammoth White Cory, 48 

Landreth, Syn. of Landreth Sugar, 46 

Landreth Early, 95 

Landreth Hybrid, 95 

Landreth Late, Syn. of Landreth Sugar, 46 

" Landreth Sugar," used as a Syn. of Old Colony, 56 

Landreth Sugar, 46 

Large Cob Sugar, Syn. of Perry's Hybrid, 58 

Large Connecticut, 95 

Large Egyptian, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

Large Eight-Rowed-Sugar, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

Large Excelsior, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Large Late Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Large Mammoth Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's EvergTeen, 65 

Large Red Cob Sweet, see Red Cob Sweet, 62 

Large Rhode Island Sweet, 15 

Late Concord, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 

Late Eight-Rowed, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

Late Mammoth, 21, 47; Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Late Mammoth Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Late Red Cob, 95 

Late Sugar Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Late Sweet Mammoth, 21; Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Lead-All Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 



INDEX 



107 



Leet's, Syn. of Leet's Early, 46 

Leet's Early, 46 

Leonard's Narrow Grain Evergreen, see Narrow Grained 

Evergreen, 53 
Little Gem. Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 
Livingston's Evergreen, Syn. of Red Cob Evergreen, 62 
Livingston's Red Cob, Syn. of Red Cob Evergreen, 62 
Long Island Beauty, 70, 83: 111. 42; Var. 46 
London Market, 95 
Long Narrow Grained Evergreen, Syn. of Narrow Grained 

Evergreen, 53 
Longfellow Sugar, Syn. of Early Longfellow, 95 
Low's Perfection, see Perfection, 57 
Lucky Strike, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 
Lyman's Pride, 47 

Macomber, 95 

Maine, Syn. of Burbank's Early Maine, 24 

Maine Crosby, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Maine Style Evergreen, Syn. of Narrow Grained Ever- 
green, 53 

Malakhoff, 53: Var. 47 

Mammoth, 111. 43: Var. 48 

Mammoth Cory, 78; Syn. of Mammoth White Cory, 48 

Mammoth Early Epicure, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 

Mammoth Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Mammoth Sugar, 7; Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

" Mammoth Sugar," used as a Syn. of Hickox, 43 

Mammoth Sweet, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Mammoth Sweet Eight-Rowed, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

Mammoth White Cory, 32, 49; 111. 48: Var. 48 

Mammoth White Cob Cory, Syn. of Mammoth White 
Cory, 48 

Mammoth White Surprise, 95 

Manchester, 95 

Manitowoc, 95 

Maple Sugar, 95 

Marblehead, 49 

Marblehead Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Marblehead Sugar, Syn. of Marblehead, 49 

Market Gardener, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Market Gardener's Extra Early, Syn. of Independence, 
9, 45 

Maule, Syn. of Maule's XX, 49 

Maule's XX, 49 

Maule's Improved Giant, Syn. of Improved Giant, 45 

Maule's Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 48 

Maule's Nonesuch, Syn. of Nonesuch, 55 

Mayflower, 49 

Mayflower No. 2, Syn. of Mayflower, 49 

Medium Crosby, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Melrose, 50 

Metropolitan, 64, 72: Var. 50 

Mexican, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 

Mexican Black Sugar, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 

Mexican Sweet, Syn. of Black Mexican, 22 

Mexican Wonder, 50 

Michell's Delicious, see Delicious, 30 

Midget, 111. 25, 49; Var. 50 

Milford's Pride, Syn. of Pride of Milford, 61 

Mimms' Hybrid, 51 

Minnesota, 38; Syn. of Early Minnesota, 36 

Minnesota Crosby, see Crosby, 29 

Mohawk Valley Extra Early, 95 

Money Maker, 65: Var. 51 

Moonarchie, 52 

Moore's Concord, 25, 75; Var. 52 

Moore's Early, 19: Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 

Moore's Late Concord, Syn. of Moore's Concord, 52 

Morning Dew, 52 

Musser, 95 

Narragansett, 75: Var. 52 

Narrow Grained Evergreen, 111. 25, 52; Var. 53 

Narrow Grain Hybrid, 8 

Nector, 53 

Ne Plus Ultra, 111. 53; Var. 53 

New Belle Isle, Syn. of Belle Isle, 21 

New Bonanza, Syn. of Bonanza, 23 

New Champion, Syn. of Champion, 25 

New Corn No. 7, 95 

New " Cory," Syn. of Marblehead, 49 

New Cupid, Syn. of Cupid, 29 

New Earliest Sheffield, Syn. of Sheffield, 64 

New Early, 54 

New Early Bonanza, Syn. of Bonanza, 23 

New Early Champion, Syn. of Champion, 25 

New Early Daybreak, 95 

New Early Essex, Syn. of Early Essex, 33 

New Early Evergreen, Syn. of Early Evergreen, 33 



New Early Giant, Syn. of Kendel's Early Giant, 46 

New Early Snowflake, Syn. of New Snowflake, 54 

New Early Sunrise, Syn. of Early Sunrise, 38 

New Early Wonder 95, see Early Wonder, 39 

New Eclipse, Syn. of Eclipse, 95 

New Egyptian, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

New England, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

New England 8-Rowed, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

New England Eight-Rowed Early, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

New England Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

New England Orange, 95 

New England Sugar, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

New England Sweet, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

New Excelsior, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

New Everbearing, Syn. of Everbearing, 40 

New Extra Early White Cory, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

New French Honey, Syn. of French Honey, 95 

New Honey Sweet, Syn. of Honey, 44 

New Mammoth White Cory, Syn. of Mammoth White 

Cory, 48 
New Melrose, Syn. of Melrose, 50 
New Mexican Wonder, Syn. of Mexican Wonder, 50 
New Peachblow, Syn. of Peachblow, 95 
New Queen, 50; Var. 54 
New Queen Sweet, Syn. of New Queen, 54 
New Red Cob Evergreen, Syn. of Red Cob Evergreen, 62 
New Rose, 95 

New Silver Coin, Syn. of Silver Coin, 65 
New Sixty-Day, Syn. of Early Market, 36 
New Snowflake, 54 

New Snow White Evergreen, Syn. of White Evergreen, 69 
New Striped Evergreen, Syn. of Striped Evergreen, 95 
New 3-Ear, Syn. of Stark's Three-Ear, 65 
New Triumph, Syn. of Triumph, 67 
New White Cob Cory, Syn. of White Cory, 69 
New White Evergreen, Syn. of White Evergreen, 69 
New Wonder, 54 
New York Family, 95 

New York Farmers' Club, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 
Nonesuch, 55 
Nonpareil, 55 
Nordheim, 55 

North Pole, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 
North Star, 95 

Northern Pedigree, 34; Var. 55 
Northern Success, 95 
Northrup King & Co. XXXX, 95 
Noxal, 95 

Oakview Early Market, see Early Market, 36 

Oakview Market, 95; see Portland Market, 59 

Ohio Evergreen Red Cob, Syn. of Red Cob Evergreen, 62 

Ohio Monarch, Syn. of Early Monarch, 95 

Olcott, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Olcott's Farmers' Club, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Old Asylum, Syn. of Asylum, 20 

Old Colony, 7; Var. 56 

Old Colony Sugar, Syn. of Old Colony, 56 

Orange County Cream, 95 

Oregon Evergreen, 56; 111. 62: Var. 56 

Original Crosby, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Papoon, 17; Var. 57 
Peachblow, 95 

Pearl, Syn. of Early Pearl, 37 
Pearl of Waterloo, 95 
Pedigree, Syn. of Stablers, 65 

Pedigree Stowell's Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Ever- 
green, 65 
Pedigree, Syn. of Northern Pedigree, 55 
Pee and Kay, 57 
Peep O'Day, 19; Var. 57 
Perfection, 57 

Perfection Early, see Perfection, 58 
Perfection 2nd Early, 95 
Perry, Syn. of Perry's Hybrid, 58 
Perry's Hybrid, 34, 61; Var. 58 
Perry's Hybrid Early, Syn. of Perry's Hybrid, 58 
Perry's New Early Evergreen, see Early Evergreen, 33 
Peters Black, 22 
Pharaoh's Dream, 58 
Philadelphia Favorite, 95 
Phillip's New Wonder, 95 
Pickaninny, 22, 71, 80; Var. 58 
Pink, Syn. of Cory, 27 
Pink Cob Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Pink Cob Evergreen, Syn. of Red Cob Evergreen, 62 
Pink Evergreen, Syn. of Red Evergreen, 62 
Pioneer, Syn. of Surprise, 66 
Pocohontas, 59 



108 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Portland, Syn. of Portland Hybrid, 59 

Portland Hybrid, 59 

Portland Market, 36; Var. 59 

Portuguese, Syn. of Dighton, 31 

Potter, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Potter's Excelsior, 59 

Potter's Superb, 95 

Pratt's Early, 60 

Premo, 60 

Price's 1900, 60 

Price and Reed's Perfection, see Perfection, 58 

Pride of America, 60 

Pride of Chenango, 95 

Pride of Milford, 61 

Prolific, 61 

Prosperity Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Pure Improved Ne Plus Ultra, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 

Quaker, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 
Quaker Sweet, 28; Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra, 53 
Queen, Syn. of New Queen, 54 
Queen of the Earliest, Syn. of Peep O'Day, 57 
Quincy Market, 34, 82 ; Var. 61 

Red Cob, Syn. of Red Cob Sweet, 62 

Red Cob Cory, 20; Syn. of Cory, 27 

Red Cob Early Sweet, Syn. of Red Cob Sweet, 62 

Red Cob Evergreen, 62 

Red Cob Sugar, Syn. of Red Cob Sweet, 62 

Red Cob Sweet, 7; Var. 62 

Red Cory, 16; Syn. of Cory, 27 

Red Evergreen, 62 

Redgreen, 8; see Red Evergreen, 62 

Red Leaved White Evergreen, Syn. of Redgreen, 62 

Red River, 62 

Red Sweet, Syn. of Red Cob Sweet, 62 

Rennies XXX, 95 

Rhode Island, Syn. of Bearsfoot, 21 

Rhode Island Asylum, Syn. of Asylum, 20 

Rhode Island Bearfoot, Syn. of Bearsfoot, 21 

Rhode Island Sweet, 6; see Asylum, 20 

Rice's Early Evergreen, see Early Evergreen, 33 

Ringleader, 95 

Robinson's Early, 95 

Rochester, Syn. of Eight-Rowed, 40 

Rochester Eight -Rowed, Syn. of Eight -Rowed, 40 

Roslyn, Syn. of Roslyn Hybrid, 62 

Roslyn Hybrid, 62 

Roslyn Hybrid Sugar, 21; Syn. of Roslyn Hybrid, 62 

Roslyn Hybrid Sweet, Syn. of Roslyn Hybrid, 62 

Ruby, 63 

Ruby Queen, 95 

Ruby Sugar, Syn. of Ruby, 63 

Ruby Sweet, Syn. of Ruby, 63 

Russell, Syn. of Prolific, 61 

Russell Early, Syn. of Prolific, 61 

Russell's Prolific, Syn. of Prolific, 61 

St. Louis Market, 95 

Salzer No. 48, Syn. of Cory, 27 

Sampson's Early, 95 

Saunders, 63 

Saunders Second Early, Syn. of Saunders, 63 

Schell's Silver Beauty, 95 

Scott's Early Perfection, see Perfection, 57 

Second Early, 95 

" Second Early," used as a Syn. of Saunders, 63 

Second Early Standard, 95 

Select Early Evergreen, Syn. of Early Evergreen, 33 

Selected Mammoth Early Cory, Syn. of Mammoth White 

Cory, 48 
September Morn, 63 
Shakers, 63 

Shakers Early, Syn. of Shakers, 63 
Shakers Early Sweet, Syn. of Shakers, 63 
Shakers Large Early, Syn. of Shakers, 63 
Shallcross' Five-Eared Sugar, see Five-Eared Sugar, 41 
Shedaker's Choice, 95 
Sheffield, 64 
Shoe Peg, 64 
" Shoe Peg," used as a syn. of Country Gentleman, 28; of 

Ne Plus Ultra, 53 
Shoe Peg Evergreen, Syn. of Zig Zag Evergreen, 70 
Shumway's Western Queen. Syn. of Pee and Kay, 57, 68 
Silver Bantam, 111. 63; Var. 64 
Silver Beauty, Syn. of Howling Mob, 44 
Silver Coin, 65 

Silver Queen, Syn. of Best of All, 21 
Simmond's Special, 95 
Simpsonia, Syn. of Simpsonia Prolific, 95 



59 
59 



Simpsonia Prolific, 95; see Prolific, 61 

Sixty-Day Make Good, Syn. of Early Market, 36 

Sixty-Day Premo, Syn. of Premo, 60 

Slate Sweet, Syn. of Black Sweet, 7 

Small Early Sweet, 6, 15 

Smith's Early White, 95 

Snow Cream, Syn. of Snow Cream Table, 65 

Snow Cream Table, 65 

Snow White Evergreen, Syn. of White Evergreen, 69 

Sonderegger's Earliest, 95 

Sonyea Intermediate, Syn. of Old Colony, 56 

Southern, Syn. of Early Southern Sweet, 38 

Southern Express, 95 

Southern White, see Old Colony, 56 

Squantum, Syn. of Potter 's Excelsior, 59 

Squantum Sugar, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 

Squantum Sweet, Syn. of Potter's Excelsior, 

Stabler's, 65 

Stabler's Early, Syn. of Stabler's, 65 

Stabler's Early Pedigree, Syn. of Nonpareil, 55 

Stabler's Early Sugar, Syn. of Stabler's, 65 

Stabler's Extra Early, Syn. of Stabler's, 65 

Stabler's Pedigree, Syn. of Stabler's, 65 

Stabler's Extra Early Pedigree, Syn. of Nonpareil, 55 

Stabler's Nonpareil, Syn. of Nonpareil, 55 

Standard Earliest, 95 

Standard Maine Crop, 95 

Stark's Three-Ear, 65 

Stay Green, Syn. of Lyman's Pride, 47 

Stowell's, 21, 31; Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

Stowell's Evergreen, 7, 31, 33, 47, 63, 71, 76, 83; 111. 

Var. 65 
Stowell's Evergreen Hybrid, 8 

Stowell's State Fair, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 
Stowell's Evergreen Sweet, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 
Stowell's Sugar, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 
Striped Evergreen, 95 

Sugar Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 
Sugar Giant, Syn. of Hickox, 43 
Sugar Kernel, 95 
Sugar Loaf, 95 

Sugar Productive, Syn. of Darling's Early, 29 
Sugar Sweet, Syn. of Cupid, 29 
Sugar XX, 95 

Sunnyslope, Syn. of Sunnyslope Special, 66 
Sunnyslope Special, 67; Var. 66 
Sunrise, Syn. of Early Sunrise, 38 
Superb, Syn. of Portland Market 
Surecropper Sugar, 95 
Surprise, 66 
Sweet, 6, 32, 83 

Sweet Bonanza, Syn. of Bonanza 
Sweet Cory, Syn. of Cory, 27 
Sweet Cream, 95 

Sweet Early Bonanza, Syn. of Bonanza, 23 
Sweet or Sugar, see Dwarf Early, 32 
Sweet Squaw, 58; Var. 67 
Sweet Sugar, see Dwarf Early, 32 
Sweetheart, 67 



25; 



65 



59 



23 



95 



Table Pedigree, 95 

Telephone, 95 

Telephone Sweet, Syn. of Telephone 

The Carolina, 95 

The Don, 95 

The Honey, Syn. of Honey, 44 

Thorburn's Early White Perfection, see Perfection, 57 

Three-Ear, Syn. of Stark's Three-Ear, 65 

Tom Thumb, 67 

Top-Notch, Syn. of Early Mammoth, 35 

Trimble, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Trimble's Improved, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Trimble's Sugar, Syn. of Farmers' Club, 40 

Triple Ear, 95 

Triumph, 67 

Triumph Sugar, Syn. of Triumph, 67 

Triumph Sweet, Syn. of Triumph, 67 

Troy Market, 95 

Truckers Early, 95 

True Crosby, Syn. of Crosby, 28 

Tuckit, 95 

Twelve-Rowed Sweet, 7; see Burr's Improved, 24 

Two-Eared Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen 

Uncle Sam, 95 

Upson's Columbia, Syn. of Columbia, 26 

Vanguard, 111. 66; Var. 67 
Verifirst, 95 
Vermont Pedigree, 95 
Vick's Morning Dew, Syn. 
Voorhees Red, 68 



65 



of Morning Dew, 52 



INDEX 



109 



Washburn, 95 

Washington, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

" Washington," used as a Syn. of Bearsfoot, 21 

Washington Bearsfoot, Syn. of Bearsfoot, 21 

Washington Market, Syn. of Egyptian, 39 

" Washington Market," used as a Syn. of Bearsfoot, 21 

Wayahead, Syn. of Dighton, 31 

Western Queen, 68 

Whipple's Early, Syn. of Whipple's Early White, 68 

Whipple's Early White, 88; 111. 25, 67; Var. 68 

White Bantam, Syn. of Best of All, 21 

White Cob, 95 

White Cob Cory, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

White Cob Early Cory, Syn. of White Cory, 69 

White Cob Evergreen, Syn. of Stowell's Evergreen, 65 

White Cob Marblehead, 69 

White Cory. 69 

White Evergreen, 53, 71; Var. 69 

White Malakhoff, Syn. of Malakhoff, 47 

White Mexican, 69 

White Perfection, see Perfection, 57 

White Prolific, Syn. of Prolific, 61 

White Snow-flake, Syn. of New Snowflake, 54 

White Sunrise, 70 

White Sunrise, Syn. of Early Sunrise, 38 

White Sweet, 95 

White Wonder, 95 

Wilkes Big Four, Syn. of Big Four, 22 

Willet's Perfection, see Perfection, 58 

Wisconsin Beauty, 95 

Wonder of the Market, 70 

Wyoming, 95 

Yexo Sugar, 95 

Zig Zag, Syn. of Ne Plus Ultra. 53 
Zig Zag Evergreen, 70 
Yellow-kerneled, 71 

American Gold, 95 

Bantam Evergreen, 111. 25: Var. 71 

Bantam Evergreen Hybrid, 8 

Banting, 111. 25; Var. 71 

Beauty Bantam, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 77 

Brigg's Red Cob Bantam, Syn. of Red Cob Golden 

Bantam, 86 
Brighton Orange, Syn. of Early Orange, 75 
Burbank, 72 

Burbank Bantam, Syn. of Burbank, 72 
Burpee, 72 

Burpee's Sweet Orange, Syn. of Sweet Orange, Seymour's 87 
Buttercup, 111. 72; Var. 73 

California, Golden Country Gentleman, Syn. of Golden 

Cream, 79 
Carmel Golden, 73 
Carpenter's Golden Sweet, Syn. of Giant Golden Sweet, 

Carpenter's, 75 
Charlevoix, 111. 25, 73; Var. 73 
Country Queen, 95 
Cream and Honey, 74 

Delicious Bantam, Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 
Double Crossed Golden, Syn. of Kingscrost, 84 

Earliest on Earth, 95 

Earliest Yellow, Syn. of Burpee, 72 

Early Golden, 74 

Early Golden Gem, Syn. of Golden Gem, 80 

Early Golden Improved, Syn. of Early Golden, 74 

Early Golden Majoram, 95 

Early Golden Sugar, Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 

Early Golden Sunrise, 74 

Early Golden Sweet, 95 

Early Golden Wonder, 75 

Early Orange, 75 

Early Orange Sugar, Syn. of Early Orange, 75 

Early Sunshine, Syn. of Sunshine, 87 

Early Yellow Cory, Syn. of Golden Cory, 78 

Early Yellow New England, Syn. of Golden Sweet, 83 

Early Yellow Sensation, 75 

Extra Early Bantam, strain of Golden Bantam, 78 

Extra Early Golden, Syn. of Golden Early Market, 80 

Extra Early Yellow, 75; Syn. of Golden Early Market, 80 

Giant Golden Bantam, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 10-14 

Rowed, 78 
Giant Golden Sweet, Carpenter's, 75 
Gold Bond, 76 
Gold Coin, 111. 25, 76; Var. 76 



Gold Coin, Livingston's, 7; Var. 76 

Gold Medal, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 77 

Gold Nugget, 76 

Gold Nugget, Syn. of Golden Gem, 80 

Gold Standard, Syn. of Charlevoix, 73 

Gold Standard No. 5, Syn. of Sunshine, 87 

Golden, 77; Syn. of Golden Sweet, 83 

Golden Age, Lord's, 111. 25; Var. 77 

Golden Alpha, 77 

Golden Bantam, 7, 30, 42, 44, 64, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 77, 78, 

79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88; 111. 25, 77; Var. 77 
Golden Bantam Improved, Strain of Golden Bantam, 78. 

Syn. of Golden Bantam 10-14 Rowed, 78 
Golden Bantam Massachusetts Grown, strain of Golden 

Bantam, 78 
Golden Bantam Mountain Grown, strain of Golden 

Bantam, 78 
Golden Bantam Selected, strain of Golden Bantam, 78 
Golden Bantam Shoe Peg, Syn. of Golden Cream, 79 
Golden Bantam, 10- to 14-Rowed, 78 
Golden Cory, 78 

Golden Country Gentleman, Syn. of Golden Cream, 79 
Golden Cream, 111. 25, 80; Var. 79 
Golden Crosby, 79 
Golden Cross, 8 
Golden Cross Bantam, 8 
Golden Dawn, 79 

Golden Delicious, Syn. of Whipple's Early Yellow, 88 
Golden Early Market, 80 

Golden Early Yellow, Syn. of Golden Sweet, 83 
Golden Evergreen, Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 
Golden Gem, 111. 25; Var. 80 

Golden Giant, 76, 86; Syn. of Golden Giant, De Lue's, 81 
Golden Giant, De Lue's, 81 

Golden Giant Evergreen, Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 
Golden Glory, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 77 
Golden Honey, 81 

Golden Hummer, Syn. of Golden Early Market, 80 
Golden Leader, 81 
Golden Margem, 95 

Golden Nugget, 7; Var. 82; see Golden Bantam, 77 
Golden Orange, 82 
Golden Pacific, Syn. of Burpee, 72 
Golden Prize, Syn. of Golden Giant, De Lue's, 81 
Golden Rod, 83 

" Golden Rod," used as a Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 
Golden 60-Day, Syn. of Golden Early Market, 80 
" Golden Sugar," used as a Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 
Golden Sugar, 7 ; Syn. of Golden Sweet, 83 
Golden Sunburst, Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 
Golden Sunrise, 83 

Golden Sunshine, Syn. of Sunshine, 87 
Golden Sweet, 7; Var. 83; see Golden Bantam, 77 
Golden Wedding, Syn. of Golden Giant, De Lue's, 81 
Golden West, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 77 
Golden Yellow, Syn. of Golden Sweet, 83 

Indian Sweet, Syn. of Nuetta, 85 

Jewell Bantam, 84 

Jumbo Gold, Syn. of Bantam Evergreen, 71 

Kingscrost, 8; Var. 84 

Large Golden Bantam, Syn. of Sweet Orange, Seymour's, 87 

Mammoth Golden Dawn, Syn. of Golden Dawn, 79 
Minnesota 8-Row Golden Bantam, strain of Golden Ban- 
tam, 78 

New Bantam, see Burbank Bantam, 72 

New Gold Coin, Syn. of Livingston's Gold Coin, 76 

New Wonder Bantam, Syn. of Wonder Bantam, Bar 

den's, 88 
New Yellow, Syn. of Gold Coin, 76 
Nuetta, 85 

Orange, Syn. of Early Orange, 75 

Papago, 111. 25; Var. 85 

Papago Sweet, Syn. of Papago, 85 

Pure Gold, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 77 

Red Cob Golden Bantam, 86 

Spanish Gold, 86 

Sugar Loaf, 95 

Sunnybrook, 86 

Sunshine, 80; III. 25; Var. 87 

Sweet Bantam, Syn. of Golden Bantam, 77 

Sweet Orange, Seymour's, 71; 111. 25; Var. 87 



110 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Tangerine, Syn. of Burpee, 72 

Tendergold, 8 

Top Cross Bantam, 8 

Whipple's Early Yellow, 86; 111. 81: Var. 88 
Whipple's Yellow, Syn. of Whipple's Early Yellow, 88 
Wonder Bantam, Bardens, 77; Var. 88 

Yellow, Syn. of Golden Sweet, 83 

Variety names, determination of, 15 

Vaughan Seed Store, Chicago, 111., 71; Var. intr. by, 24, 25, 34, 38, 

48, 69 
Vicks, James & Sons, Rochester, N. Y., 61, 79; Var. intr. by, 52, 82 
Voorhees, D. C, Blawenburg, N. J., Var. orig. by, 67 
Voorhees, Edward B., 68 

W 

Walker, Washington, D. C, 89 

Ware, John, Plainfield, N. J., Var. orig. by, 64 

Western Seed and Irrigation Co., seedsmen, Fremont, Nebr., 16 

Western Seed Co., Denver, Colo., Var. intr. by, 33 

Whipple, Silas, Norwich, Conn., 8; Var. orig. by, 68, 88 

Wilkes, Sam, 22 

Will, G. F., 8, 22, 93 

Will, Oscar H. & Co., seedsmen, Bismarck, N. D., 92; Var. intr. by, 

21, 32, 35, 85, 93 
Wilson, J. A., 19 

Woods, T. W. & Sons, Richmond, Va., 91; Var. intr. by, 92 
Woodruff, Frank C, Orange, Conn., Var. intr. by, 28 
Woodruff, F. H. & Sons, Milford, Conn., Var. intr. by 26, 35, 61, 

75, 86 
Woodruff, S. D. & Sons, seedsmen, Orange, Conn., 16; Var. intr. 

by, 31, 33, 46, 63 



Yeager, A. F., plant breeder, North Dakota Col. of Agric, Fargo, 
N. D., 8; Var. orig. by, 80, 87 



Zea L. Sp. PI. 971. 1753. 9. 10 

alba Mill. Gard. Diet. ed. 8. no. 2. 1768. 12 
altissima Gmel. ex. Steud. Nora. Bot. ed. 1. 898. 1821. 12 
americana Mill. Gard. Diet. ed. 8. no. 1. 1768. 12 
amylacea Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; Maize, 8. 

1884. 13 
amyleasaccharata Sturt. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. 5th Ann. 

Rept. 1886 1 66. 1887. 13 
antiqua Knowlton, Joum. Wash. Acad. Sci. 9: 135. 1919. 13 

canina S. Wats. Proc. Am. Acad. 26:160. 1891. 13 
Caragua Steud. Norn. ed. 2. 2:797. 1841. sphalm. 13 
cryptosperma Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 30. 1836. 13 

Curagua Molina, Sagg. Chil. 129. 1782. 13 



erythrolepis Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais 30. 1836. 13, 92 
everra Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; Maize, 8. 
13 



1884 



gigantea foliis-variegata Nichols. Diet. Gard. 4:608. 1888. 

13 
gracillima " Hort." Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 4: 2004. 1902. 13 

hirta Bonaf. Ann. Sci. Nat. I. 17:158. 1829. 13 

indentata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; Maize, 8. 

1884. 12 
indentata var. vaginata Sturt. Maize, 8. 1884. 13 
indurata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883; Maize, 8. 

1884. 13 
indurata var. vaginata Sturt. Maize, 8, 1884. 13 

japonica VanHoutte, Fl. des Serres 16:121. 1868.13 
japonica var. vittata " Hort " Bailey, Man. Cult. PI. 104. 
1924. 13 

macrosperma Klotzsch, Bot. Zeit. 9:718. 1851. 13 

mais Alef. Landw. Fl. 303. 1866. 12 

maiz Veil. Fl. Flum. 10:t. 3. 1790. 12 

Mays L. Sp. PI. 971. 1753. 10, 12 

acrogyna Schur, Oestr. Bot. Zeitschr. 9:11. 1859. 13 
acuminata Korn. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 
aestiva Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866. 13 
alba Alef. Landw. Fl. 309. 1866. 13 
alboHava Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
alborubra Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 12 
americana Alef. Landw. Fl. 310. 1866. 13 
amylacea Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 2006. 1902. 13 



amyleasaccharata Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 2006. 

1902. 13 
androgyna Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13 
atrodulcis Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 

1:375. 1885 
autumna Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 37. 1836. 13 
autumnalis Alef. Landw. Fl. 308. 1866. 13 

caesia Alef. Landw. Fl. 310. 1866. 13 
canariensis Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 34. 1836. 13 
chilena Korn. in Kom. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 1:375. 

1885. 12 
chinensis Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13. 
coerulea Kom. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873. 13 
coeruleodulcis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 13 
compressa Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866. 13 
conica Alef. Landw. Fl. 306. 1866. 13 
corynula Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866. 13 
crinusa Alef. Landw. Fl. 309. 1866. 13 
crococeras Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 12 
crocodon Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 12 
curagua Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866. 13 
cuzcoensis Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 1 : 361. 

1885. 13 
cyanea Korn. in Kom. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 1 : 363. 

1885. 13 
cyanodon Kom. in Korn. & Wern. Hand. Getreid. 1:362. 

1885. 12 
cymosa Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 38. 1836. 13 

dentiformis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 12 
dentiformis leucoceras Raybaud. Compt. Rend. Soc. 

Biol. 84:196. 1921. 12 
diasacchara Kom. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 
dierythra Kom. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
dulcis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 

erythrodiasacchara Korn. Syst. Uebers. 28. 1873. 13 
erythrolepis Alef. Landw. Fl. 304. 1866. 13 
erythropais Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866. 13 
europaea Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866. 13 
everra Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 4:2005. 1902. 13 
excellens Alef. Landw. Fl. 304. 1866. 13 

tlavoalba Kom. Syst. Uebers. 28. 1873. 13 
flavodulcis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 
flavorubra Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 12 

gilva Kom. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
glaucopais Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866. 13 
glaucops Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866. 13 
glaucornis Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
gracillima Kom. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 
graeca Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 34. 1836. 13 

haematornis Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
hawarah Hassk. Flora 25-:Beibl. 1. 2. 1842. 13 
hirta Alef. Landw. Fl. 309. 1866. 13 
hispanica Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 35. 1836. 13 
humilis Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13 

indentata Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 2006. 1902. 12 
indurata Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 2005. 1902. 13 
involuta Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Hand. Getreid. 1:361. 
1885. 13 

japonica Korn. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873. 13 

latissima Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
leucoceras Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
leucodon Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 12 
leucodiasacchara Kom. Syst. Uebers. 28. 1873. 13 
leucopais Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866. 13 
leucornis Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
leucosperma Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13 
lilacina Kom. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873. 13 
lilacinodulcis Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 
1:361. 1885. 13 






macrosperma Korn. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 
macrosperma Schur. Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 
maxima Hassk. Flora 25-:Beibl. 1. p. 2. 1842. 
melanornis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 
microsperma Schur. Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 
microsperma Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 
minima Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 36. 1836. 13 
minima Hassk. Flora 25-:Beibl. 1. 2. 1842. 13 
minor Hassk. Flora 25-:Beibl. 1. 2. 1842. 13 
mirabilis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 
mucronata Wittmack, Zeitschr. Ethn. 12:95. 1880. 
multicolor Alef. Landw. Fl. 310. 1866. 13 



13 
13 

13 



13 



INDEX 



111 



nana Alef. Landw. Fl. 305. 1866. 13 
nigra Alef. Landw. Fl. 310. 1866. 13 
nigrorubra Korn. Syst. Uebers. 28. 1873. 13 

oryzoides Kom. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 
oxyornis Korn . Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 

pallida Hassk. Flora 25-:Beibl. 1. 2. 1842. 13 
pensylvanica Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 33. 1836. 12 
perlata Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13 
Peruviana Wittmack, Zeitschr. Ethn. 12:95. 1880. 13 
Philippi Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
poecilopais Alef. Landw. Fl. 306. 1866. 13 
poikilodiasacchara Korn. Syst. Uebers. 28. 1873. 13 
poikilodon Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 12 
poikilornis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873. 13 
poherythra Alef. Landw. Fl. 306. 1866. 13 
po/y/euca Alef. Landw. Fl. 306. 1866. 13 
polysperma Blar. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. Paris. 170:677. 

1920. 13 
polvstachytes Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 36. 1836. 13 
polyxantha Alef. Landw. Fl. 306. 1860. 13 
praecox Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 32. 1836. 13 
precox Torr. in Eaton, Man. Bot. ed. 2. 500. 1818. 13 
pungens Korn. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 
pyracea Alef. Landw. Fl. 307. 1866. 13 
pyrocarpa Alef. Landw. Fl. 310. 1866. 13 
pyroceras Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
pyrodon Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 12 

quasquinensi s Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 37, 1836. 12 
quillotensis Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 38. 1836. 12 
quinquantina Alef. Landw. Fl. 309. 1866. 13 

ramosa Schur, Oestr. Bot. Zeitschr. 9:11. 1859. 13 
recens Korn. in Kom. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 1:375. 

1885. 13 
rhodornis Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 13 
rosea Korn. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873. 13 
rostrata Bonaf. Compt. Rendu Acad. Sci. Paris. 1:683. 

1842. 13 
rubentidulcis Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 

1:361. 1885. 13 
rubra Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 40. 1836. 13 
rubra Hassk. Flora 25-:Beibl. 1. 2. 1842. 13 
ruforocaesia Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
rubrodulcis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 13 
rubronigra Korn. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1873. 13 
rubropaleata Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
rubropunctata Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
rubrostriata Korn. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 12 
rubrovelata Korn. in Kom. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 

1:362. 1885. 12 
rubrovestita Korn. in Korn. & Wern. Handb. Getreid. 

1:362. 1885. 12 
rubroviolacea Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
rugosa Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 39. 1836. 13. 14, 16, 89 



sacc/iarafa Korn. Syst. Uebers. 22. 
striata Alef. Landw. Fl. 310. 1866. 



1873. 
13 



13 



13 



1836. 
1836. 



striatidens Kom. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 12 
striatodulcis Korn. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 13 
subpraecox Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 35. 1836. 13 
symetrica Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13 
syrtica Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mats. 34. 1836. 13 

tesselata Schur, Enum. PI. Transs. 720. 1866. 13 
tincta OK. Taschen Fl. Leipzig, 52. 1867. 13 
tristis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
tunicata Larr. ex. St. Hil. Ann. Sci. Nat. 16:143. 1829. 

13 
turgida Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 34. 1836. 13 
turgida Bonaf. forma fasciata Korn. Syst. Uebers. 27. 

1873. 13 

uberior Kom. Syst. Uebers. 22. 1873. 13 

vaginata Sturt. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. 3rd Ann. Rept. 

(.1884) 186. 1885. 13 
variegata Nichols. Diet. Gard. 4:238. 1887. 13 
variodulcis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 23. 1873. 13 
versicolor Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 40. 1836. 13 
violacea Kom. Syst. Uebers. 27. 1873. 13 
virginica Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 37. 1836. 
vulgaris Kom. Syst. Uebers. 25. 1783. 13 
vulgaris Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 31. 1836 
vulgaris aestiva Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 31. 
vulgaris autumna Bonaf. Hist. Nat. Mais. 32 
vulgata Kom. Syst. Uebers. 26. 1873. 13 
vulgata autumnalis (Alef.) Korn, Syst. Uebers. 

1873. 13 
vulgata macroxantha Korn. Syst. Uebers. 26. 

1873. 13 
vulgata pensylvanica (Bonaf.) Korn. Syst. Uebers. 26. 
1873. 13 

xanthodon Alef. Landw. Fl. 311. 1866. 12 
xanthornis Kom. Syst. Uebers. 24. 1873. 13 

Zea minima " Hort." Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 4:2004. 1902. 13 
minor mel. ex Steud. Nom. ed. 1. 898. 1821. 13 
mucronata Poit. ex Vilm. in Rev. Hort. II. 5:245. 1844. 13 

praecox Pers. ex Steud. Nom. ed. 1. 898. 1821. Nomen 
nudum. 13 

ramosa Gernert, Am. Nat. 46. 616. 1912. 13 
rostrata Bonaf. Ann. Soc. Agr. Lyon 5:197. 1842. 13 

saccharata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883. Maize, 8. 

1884. 13 
saccharina Rollins, Horticulture 27:247. 1918. 13 
segetalis Salisb. Prod. 28. 1796. 12 

tunicata Sturt. Bull. Torr. Bot. Club, 21:335. 1894. 13 

vaginata Sturt. Gard. Chron. II. 20:443. 1883. 13 
vittata " Hort." Bailey, Cycl. Am. Hort. 4:2004. 1902. 13 
vulgaris Mill. Gard. Diet ed. 8. no. 3. 1768. 12 



12 
12 



26. 



1873. 13 



^ 5 



VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



VOL. 1— PART IV 



THE CUCURBITS 



STATE OF NEW YORK — EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 

THE 

VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



BY 

WILLIAM T. TAPLEY 
WALTER D. ENZIE 
GLEN P. VAN ESELTINE 



REPORT OF THE 
NEW YORK STATE AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION 
FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 30, 1935 



r LIBRARY 

NEW YORK 

BOTANICAL 

GARDEN 
ALBANY 

J. B. LYON COMPANY, PRINTERS 

1937 



>N4 

pf.4 



PREFACE 

Under authority from the State, Laws of 1925, the New York State Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station has published a portion of a work entitled The 
Vegetables of New York. The publication was to be issued in three volumes of 
several parts each. Part I of Volume 1, The Peas of New York, was printed in 
1928; Part II. The Beans of New York, was printed in 1931; Part III, The 
Sweet Corn of New York was printed in 1934; The Cucurbits of New York 
now appears as Part IV of Volume I. 

The Vegetables of New York is intended to be a more or less complete 
record of the vegetables grown in New York State. In this part the separate 
chapters give the historical and botanical status of Cucurbitaceae cultivated in 
the northern states, and full horticultural descriptions of all present-day (and some 
other) varieties of squashes and pumpkins, muskmelons and cucumbers, with 
the history of their development. 

Since the chief value to seedsmen and to growers of the cultivated cucurbits 
lies in the discussion of varieties, it is worth noting that the considerations which 
have governed the selection of varieties for full description and separation into 
major and minor sorts are as follows: The present value to commercial and home 
growers of vegetables, the potential merit of new varieties, and the previous 
importance of historical varieties to the trade. An effort has been made to give 
the vegetable breeder as complete information as possible on the characters of 
seeds, plant, and fruit of squashes and pumpkins and of the fruit of muskmelons 
and cucumbers, to describe varieties which have in the past been leading sorts 
and which therefore are of value in showing the trend in their development, and 
to indicate the comparative values between the varieties. 

Chapter II on the Systematic Botany of the Cultivated Cucurbits and that 
part of Chapter I on the early history of these crops were written by Professor G. P. 
Van Eseltine, Systematic Botanist for the Station. The remainder of the work was 
written by Professors W. T. Tapley and W. D. Enzie. All illustrations, with the 
exception of the muskmelons Bender's Surprise, Sugar Rock, and Golden Cham- 
plain and of the cucumbers Davis Perfect, Early Fortune, Vaughan, Arlington 
White Spine, and one depicting several pickle types, were prepared some years 
ago under the direction of Professor F. H. Hall, co-author of The Peas of New 
York. 

The authors wish to acknowledge many helpful suggestions from Professor 
C. B. Sayre, Chief of the Division of Vegetable Crops at this Station. 

U. P. HEDRICK 
Director, New York State Agricultural Experiment Station 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



TEXT 



CHAPTER 

Preface 



I. History of the Cultivated Cucurbits. 



II. Systematic Botany of the Cultivated 
Cucurbits 

III. Squashes and Pumpkins 

Classifications 

Cucurbita maxima 

Horticultural History 

Descriptions of Varieties. . . . 
Cucurbita Pepo 

Horticultural History 

Descriptions of Varieties .... 
Cucurbita moschata 

Horticultural History 

Descriptions of Varieties. . . . 

Supplementary List of Obscure Varieties . . 
References 



PAGE 

iii 



15 
15 
15 
15 
16 
33 
33 
3i 
51 
51 
51 

58 

59 



CHAPTER 



IV. Muskmelons . 



V. Cucumbers. 



Horticultural History 

Discussion of Classifications. 
Descriptions of Varieties. . . . 
Supplementary List of 

Obscure Varieties 

References 

Horticultural History 

Discussion of Classifications. 
Descriptions of Varieties . . . 
Supplementary List of 

Obscure Varieties 

References 



Appendix 

Methods 

Acknowledgments . 

Glossary 

Index 



PAGE 

60 
60 
60 
61 

91 
91 
93 
93 
93 
94 

108 
109 

110 
110 
110 
110 
113 



ILLUSTRATIONS 



Squash and Pumpkin 

Banana 

Boston Marrow 

Golden Hubbard 

Essex Hybrid 

Hubbard 

Mammoth 

Marblehead 

Turks Cap 

Warren 

English Vegetable Marrow 

Fordhook 

Perfect Gem 

Golden Oblong 

Italian Vegetable Marrow 

Mandan 

Small Sugar 

Sandwich Island 

Summer Crookneck 

Table Queen 

White Bush Scallop 

Winter Luxury 

Cheese 

Green Striped Cushaw 

Tennessee Sweet Potato 



Muskmelon 



Bay View .... 

Bender 

Christiana .... 
Cosmopolitan . 

Enid 

Emerald Gem . 



FACING 
PAGE 

16 
17 
20 
21 
24 
25 
28 
29 
32 
33 
38 
38 
39 
42 
43 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
56 



62 
63 
66 
67 
68 
69 



Fordhook 

Extra Early Grand Rapids . 

Kinsman Queen 

Honey Rock 

Golden Champlain 

Knight 

McCotter's Pride 



FACING 
PAGE 

70 
71 
74 
75 
75 
78 
79 



Cucumber 

Early Fortune 94 

Arlington White Spine 94 

Cumberland 95, 96 

Early Cyclone 95 

Irish Queen 96 

Early Frame 97 

Noroton Select White Spine 97 

Extra Long White Spine 98 

Windsor Pickling 98 

Capital 99 

Lemon 99 

National Pickle 100 

Boston Pickling 100 

Snow's Pickling 100 

Parisian Pickle 101 

Perfected Pickle 101 

Peerless White Spine 102 

Price's Hybrid 103 

Mature cucumber fruits 104 

Salad 105 

White Wonder 105 

Vaughan 106 

Davis Perfect 106 

West India Gherkin 107 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK. I 



LEGUMES, CUCURBITS, CORN, ALLIUMS 



PART IV: THE CUCURBITS 



CHAPTER I 
THE HISTORY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



NEW YORK 

BOTANICAL 

GARDEN 



The history of the cultivated cucurbits, if written in 
full, would form a large part of the story of the develop- 
ment of agriculture in the tropics and subtropics of both 
Old World and New. Of the forms most cultivated in 
New York State, the squashes \ pumpkins, etc. (Cucur- 
bita spp. > originated in tropical America w^hile the 
melons and cucumbers {Cucumis spp.) as well as the 
watermelon {Citrullus vulgaris) and the gourd - 
{Lagenaria siceraria) came from the tropics of the 
Old World. Of the other genera briefly mentioned in 
this volume about half are of New World origin and the 
remainder are from the warmer parts of the eastern 
hemisphere. 

The place of origin of the annual Cucurbitas was 
long a moot question. As late as 1855 DeCandolle was 
dubious as to their source, but in 1882 he had admitted 
that the pepos were of American origin, though he still 
doubted that maii'mas were from the same region. At 
that time he gave the weight of evidence as favoring an 
American origin for a third member of this group, the 
moschatas; and noted in regard to the black-seeded 
perennial pumpkin or Malabar gourd (Cucurbita 
ficifolia) that he doubted its Asiatic origin "as all 
the known perennial species of Cucurbita are from Mexico 
or California." All recent evidence, however, points to 
tropical America as the place of origin of the three 
important domesticated types as well as the two or three 
less known species. There are no unquestionable records 
of annual Cucurbitas in pre-Columbian times except in 
America. Seeds belonging apparently to nearly all 
species are known from pre-Columbian graves. The 
flowers held a sacred place in the religion of some of the 
Indian tribes, pointing to a great antiquity of culture. 3 

Results of crossing the three species suggest some 
type of moschata or a very closely allied form as the 
primitive type of the group, and moschata is extremely 
common and widespread in the American Tropics. 
According to Vaviloff's theory that the center of distri- 
bution of a species is marked by a concentration of 



variations of that species, tropical America would thus 
be designated as the place of origin of the annual types. 
From this center apparently the maximas first developed 
in the southern part of the region and spread into Peru, 
Bolivia, and other South American countries. Sometime 
later it would seem that the pepos developed on the 
northern border and spread north through Mexico and 
the southern United States. There is evidence that 
seeds were carried from one region to the other, possibly 
by trade, and consequently a few members of each type 
are found in the general distribution region of the others. 
While such forms of maxima as Arikara and Winnebago 
were introduced into American trade from forms culti- 
vated by plains and prairie Indians, it seems a reasonable 
explanation, in view of the history of these peoples — 
the Arikara and related tribes having come originally 
from the Southwest — that these varieties actually 
originated in the tropics and found their way northward 
at a fairly early date. It is likewise extremely probable 
that the annual species originated from perennial 
ancestors in southern Mexico or northern Central 
America. 

The culture of some of these squashes and pumpkins 
is nearly if not quite as old as that of maize; and the 
presence in eastern Asia of peculiar forms of squashes 
(and of waxy-endosperm corn) hints of the possibility 
of transfer to Asia by a returning migration of the 
aborigines — a circumstance that has been indirectly 
suggested by the ethnologists interested in the origin of 
the American Indian. However, the distribution of 
most of the New World types into the Old World and 
vice-versa took place in the 16th and 17th centuries. 
It is rather difficult in many cases to tie up the names 
used then with the forms now known or the present use of 
these names. The following names are found in the 
older literature, and many of the terms are used as 
indiscriminately as are our present epithets: " pompions " 
or " pumpions," " pumpkins," " gourds," " melons," 
" millions," " maycocks," " askutasquash," " quaasien," 



1 The terms " squash " and " pumpkin " are unfortunately among the few common English names that do not refer to a specific kind 
of plant. Of the three distinct species of domesticated cucurbits, viz., Cucurbita maxima. C. Pepo, and C. moschata. all have forms to 
which these names are applied. An attempt, thus far unsuccessful, has been made in America to restrict the use of the term " squash " 
to varieties of Cucurbita maxima and to apply the term " pumpkin " to the other two species. In Australia nearly the opposite recom- 
mendation has been made: namely, that " squash " be applied tc C. Pepo and " pumpkin " to C. maxima — the terms " gramma " or 
"rio" being applied to C. moschata. The Australian recommendation is, we believe, the more logical; but, since trade catalogs and horti- 
cultural literature in general still apply these names more or less indiscriminately, it has been decided for the purposes of this volume to refer 
to these three kinds of plants simply as " maximas," " pepos," and " moschatas," leaving the use of the terms " squash " and " pumpkin " 
as local tradition and common usage may dictate. 

- Gourd is likewise used as a general name, the entire family Cucurbitaceae being known as the gourd family. In a more specific 
way the term refers to the hard-shelled types of fruits; and the useful and the so-called ornamental gourds which are so popular at present, 
are fruits of various species including Benincasa hispida, Cucumis dipsaceus. Cucumis Melo, Cucurbita Pepo ovifera, Lagenaria 
siceraria, Luffa cylindrica, Momordica Charantia, Trichosant hes Anguina, and others. It should be noted that the " Calabash 
gourd " is the fruit of Lagenaria while the true Calabash is the fruit of Crescentia Cujete, a tree belonging to the same family as the catalpa. 

3 Reference should be made here to a recent paper by L. R. Parodi in Anales de la Academia Nacional de Agronomia y Veterinaria de 
Buenos Aires, 1 : 142. 1935) in which he lists C. maxima among the plants cultivated by the natives of northeastern Argentina before the 
arrival of the Spaniards. 

3 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



" squash," " ecushaws," " bucklers " or " buckler- 
gourds," " simnels " and, in French, " melons," " gros 
melons," " courges," " concombres," and " citronelles." 
Sturtevant in his Notes 4 has traced back the usage 
of many of these names; as has L. H. Bailey in his paper 
" De Cucurbitis Domesticatis — I." 5 

It is very likely that the pepos were the first to be 
introduced into Europe and among the earliest was the 
small, apple-shaped type of pumpkin now represented by 
" Perfect Gem." Described by Fuchsius in 1542 and by 
Tragus ten years later, this form seems also to have been 
the " maycock " of early Virginian reports. The Bush 
Scallop or Cymling type was apparently known to 
Bauhin in 1561 and is the " buckler " or " simnel gourd " 
of Ray in 1686. The Connecticut Field types, or as 
Burr in 1863 called them the " Canada " and " Common 
Yellow " forms, were known shortly after the middle 
of the 16th century to Bauhin, Lobelius, Gerard, and 
others. Linnaeus in his Species Plantarum cited a cut 
from Dalechamps (1586 or 1587) which is a reversed 
picture of a cut in Mathiolus (1560). 

The moschatas soon followed, Large Cheese being 
apparently known to Lobelius in 1591, as was, according 
to Sturtevant's views, a form similar to Tennessee Sweet 
Potato. The striped Winter Crookneck was probably 
the " ecushaw " of Thomas Hariot in his " Narrative 
of the First English plantation of Virginia," first printed 
in London in 1588, and was almost certainly the form 
recorded by Ray (1686) who received seeds from Sir 
Hans Sloane and planted them in his garden. 

The early records for the maximas are rather 
scarce though plates from Lobelius' Icones (1581) and 
Bauhin's Historia (1619) are listed as illustrating this 
species by later writers and are recognizable as to type 
of flower, leaf and fruit. The turban variety was 
apparently also seen by Bauhin in 1607. 

In northeastern America the maximas seem not 
to have been known and all early records point to an 
extensive use of pepos and moschatas. Such early 
references as have been made to Hubbard-like forms 
may well refer to forms of pepo like Nantucket. The 
general use of squashes, in the strict sense of forms of 
C. maxima, began with the introduction of Acorn, 
Valparaiso and other South American forms by Yankee 
sailors early in the 19th century. 

Of the pepos, curiously enough the crookneck does 
not appear with certainty in literature until 1828 when, 
according to Sturtevant, it was listed by Thorburn, 
though scallops or cymlings, the large yellow types, and 
the rough green Nantucket-like forms were all noted by 
early colonists. The vegetable marrows, both English 
and Italian forms, are also apparently fairly recent 
developments as are the so-called " fall squashes " of 
both maxima and pepo types. 



Paralleling the controversy over the American origin 
of the squashes has been the discussion of the origin of 
the Bur Gherkin (Cucumis Anguria) still occasionally 
called the West Indian Gherkin. That its wild counter- 
part has not been found in Africa is of little significance 
compared to the facts that all its near allies are African, 
that there are no American relatives, and that it has 
been found in America only where it could have been 
introduced by the negroes or through their more or less 
direct agency. Both Hooker and DeCandolle believed 
the Gherkin to be of African origin and no evidence has 
been offered other than mere arbitrary statements for an 
American origin. Like many another plant from the 
Old World it has apparently found conditions in America 
well adapted for its dissemination and so-called wild 
specimens are undoubtedly adventive. It is unquestion- 
ably of African origin and was introduced into the 
warmer parts of America in the 16th century. 

The cucumber (Cucumis sativus) or the primitive 
form from which it descended, probably originated in 
Africa but very early spread to Asia where it has been 
found wild in Northern India and where according to 
DeCandolle, it has been cultivated for three thousand 
years. It was grown by the ancient Greeks and Romans. 
In the Caucasus region there are names for the cucumber 
that indicate knowledge of the plant before it was known 
to the Sanskrit, but there seems to be no certain evidence 
that it was known to the ancient Egyptians. It was 
cultivated throughout most of Europe in the Middle 
Ages. Many of the forms grown at the time of the 
early herbals seem to have been less symmetrical and 
more rugged than those grown today, though Mathiolus 
(1560) and Bauhin (1650) show figures of types very 
like some of our modern improved varieties. A half 
dozen or more types seem to have been known in Europe 
in the 16th century. 

The melon (Cucumis Melo) also originated in 
tropical Africa. DeCandolle in his " Origin of Culti- 
vated Plants " says " several forms found wild which 
have been described as species, must be the types and 
sources of the cultivated forms; and Naudin makes the 
very just observation that these wild types which differ 
more or less from one another may have produced dif- 
ferent cultivated varieties. This is the more probable 
since they sometimes inhabit countries as remote from 
each other as Southern Asia and tropical Africa, so that 
differences in climate and isolation have created and 
consolidated varieties." However, with three rather 
dubious exceptions, all species of Cucumis are definitely 
of African origin and the closest allies of these three are 
native African species. There can be no reasonable 
doubt of the origin of the genus in tropical Africa, 
though C. 7VTe/o and C. sativus apparently spread into 
Asia sufficiently early for rather typical forms to have 



1 Sturtevant's Notes on Edible Plants — U. P. Hedrick. 27th Ann. Rept. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Station, Vol. 2. pt. 2. 1919. 

' Bailey, L. H., Gentes Herbarum 2: 63. 1929. This paper is a most delightful and informing discussion of cultivated Cucurbitas 
and one that should be read by all interested in these fascinating plants. To Dr. Bailey, both for his elucidation of many points of difficulty 
in the discussion just mentioned and for the privilege of consulting the excellent collection in his herbarium, the authors here wish to express 
their gratitude. 



THE HISTORY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



developed in that country.''' It seems very doubtful that 
the Egyptians, the Greeks, or the Romans knew the 
melon. Certainly no very tasty forms were known to 
them and it is not until after the Middle Ages that 
improved forms became sufficiently widespread to merit 
comment in the writings of the day, though Sturtevant 
cites Palladius in the early part of the 3rd century as not- 
ing the fruits as " sweet and odorus." He also states that 
in 1554, Amatus Lusitanus mentioned " thin skinned, 
thick skinned, red-fleshed and white-fleshed " forms, 
as well as early, late and winter melons. Yellow- 
fleshed sorts were noted by Dodonaeus in 1616 and green- 
fleshed by Marcgravius in 1648. Warted types were 
seen by Lobelius before 1570 and netted and ribbed sorts 
were named by Camerarius in 1586. Round, long, oval, 
and pear shaped melons were mentioned by Gerard (1597) 
and other types appeared frequently in literature during 
the next quarter century. There is little evidence of the 
popularity of melons before this time, the middle and 
close of the 16th century, and one may well believe that 
they were one of the plants most highly developed in 
this period of great garden interest. Don says that the 
melon has been cultivated in England since 1570. In 
the 17th century, frequent mention of melons is to be 
found in American literature and it would seem that 
the early introductions of the species by Europeans had 
been very popular with the Indians among whom melon 
culture spread rapidly at least along the seaboard. 

The watermelon ( Citrullus vulgaris) and the white- 
flowered gourd (Lagenaria siceraria) are cultivated 



to but a slight extent in New York State. Both are 
of African origin though the gourd must have spread 
to Asia in very early times, and both have a long history 
of culture. The watermelon was cultivated in ancient 
Egypt and has for ages been a favorite fruit of the 
African negroes. It seems to have been introduced 
into Europe at about the beginning of the Christian 
era and by the 16th century was cultivated wherever it 
could be grown satisfactorily. Sturtevant thought that 
the watermelon had nearly reached the height of its 
development by that time and that very little had been 
done in the way of improvement of varieties since. Its 
culture has spread widely in warmer and warm temperate 
parts of America where climatic and soil conditions seem 
to have been especially favorable. In this State it is 
grown largely for home use or for the local market. 

The gourd is grown in New York for some of the 
larger city markets and occasionally in the home garden. 
It became known to the Romans about the beginning of 
the Empire and was probably not known to the ancient 
Greeks. DeCandolle remarks that it was much more 
widely grown in Europe in the 16th century than at 
present. As a food plant the vegetable marrows, though 
no easier of culture and less prolific, have largely taken 
its place because of their superior quality. 

Further notes on the horticultural history of the 
various groups of cucurbits treated in this volume will 
be found associated with the discussion of varieties, 
where they may more properly be associated with the 
types now cultivated. 



B The origin of the whole family of Cucurbitaceae presents an interesting study as approximately 2 5 of the genera known are from 
Africa, 2 5 from America and the other 1/5 largely from tropical Asia. This distribution lends color to the suggestion that Africa and 
South America were once united and to the idea that the Cucurbitaceae arose in this united plant province and spread later to Asia with 
a few genera still later differentiating north and south of the original habitat. 



CHAPTER II 
SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



The plant family (Cucurbitaceae) constitutes one 
of the most interesting assemblages of plants known. f 
Many of its members develop a tremendous vegetative 
growth and a remarkable amount of fruit from an 
apparently insignificant and inadequate root system; 
and the floral structures have rendered its relationships 
a matter of debate among botanists ever since a natural 
system of classification was first attempted." The wide 
spread of this family through the tropics would indicate 
a considerable age, but many of the sub-groups seem to 
show by their extreme variability and genetic fluidity 
that the group is in an evolutionary flux. 

The family is divided into five tribes (in the Engler 
system of classification) each of which contains some 
plants of economic significance, especially in the Tropics. 
To the dweller in the temperate zones, however, only 
one of these tribes, the Cucurbiteae, assumes real 
importance. Here are gathered the gourds, pumpkins, 
squashes, vegetable marrows, melons, cucumbers, water- 
melons, etc., — a group of fruits and vegetables which 
have pleased the palates of gourmets and intrigued the 
interest of plant students and breeders for many a 
generation. The vegetative parts of many species have 
drastic purgative qualities, and the seeds of a large 
number are rich in oils. Some species are useful orna- 
mentals. The general characters of the family follow: 

Cucurbitaceae Juss. Gen. 393. 1789. 

Climbing herbs (rarely erect shrubsl generally equipped with 
branched tendrils, now considered modified branchlets; leaves 
alternate, palmately veined, entire or more or less divided; flowers 
usually (but not always 1 unisexual and with both kinds ordinarily 
on the same plant, regular, perigynous; corolla and calyx usually 
with the members united; stamens regularly 5 or 3 (by adnation 
of two pairs), rarely and irregularly 4; anthers sometimes straight 
but often curved or variously contorted; ovary usually 3- or 
5-carpelled, sometimes irregularly 4 or 6, inferior; fruit a pepo 
i.e., with a thick rind and a fleshy or spongy many-seeded center , 
rarely dehiscent. 

About 90 genera and 700 species, mostly of the warmer parts 
of the world. 

KEY TO TRIBES. -After Muller and Pax) 

Anthers more or less distinct. 

Stamens with filaments free or with some pairs united. 

Filaments 5 (rarely 4) entirely free or united at the base. 

/. Fevilleae. 
Filaments 3 rarely 2 or 4 ' by adnation of two pairs. 

Pollen sacs straight or somewhat curved. //. Melothrieae. 

Pollen sacs S or U shaped ///. Cucurbiteae. 

Stamens with filaments united in a tube IV. Sicyoideae. 

Anthers united in a ring V. Cyclant hereae . 



The Fevilleae, Tribe I, is of interest only as a 
source of certain drugs and a few ornamentals. 

The Melothrieae, Tribe II, contains among others 
three genera of some importance: Melothria, with a 
number of ornamental species, the small fruits of which 
are of minor value as food in the Tropics ; Cucumeropsis, 
one species of which, C. edulis from tropical Africa, 
bears edible fruits a foot long and three inches thick; 
Telfairea, an African genus of two species, both of which 
produce oily edible seeds; and Kedrostis, an East Indian 
species which is said to have edible fruits. 

The Cucurbiteae, Tribe III, contains the Naras, 
Acanthosicyos horrida, a leafless thorny erect shrub 
with edible seed and fruits which are about 5 inches in 
diameter and of a delicious subacid flavor; Hodgsonia 
heteroclita of Burma and the Himalayas also with 
edible seeds; and the more important gourds, squashes, 
etc., described in detail in the following pages. 

The Sicyoideae, Tribe IV, is notable for the 
Chayote — the fruit of Sechium edule — a favorite 
vegetable in Central America, the culture of which 
has spread through the warmer parts of America and 
into the Mediterranean region in Europe. A related 
plant, the Tacaco, Polakowskia tacaco, from northern 
South America, has also somewhat similar edible fruits. 
Coccinea, a genus of about 14 species from Southern 
Asia and Africa, has several species of ornamental value; 
and the fruits of C. cordifolia (C. indica) are used in 
curries in India, while those of some, at least, of the 
African species are used to some extent as food. 

The Cyclant hereae, Tribe V, contains a single genus 
of 30 or more species, of which, a variety of one, Cyclan- 
thera pedata var. edulis, is cultivated in Peru and 
Bolivia for its large edible fruits. 

KEY TO IMPORTANT GENERA OF THE TRIBE 
CUCURBITEAE 

Lobes of corolla fimbriate 1. Trichosanthes 

Lobes of corolla not fimbriate; 
Corolla rotate; 

Calyx tube of staminate flowers much lengthened. .2. Lagenaria 
Calyx tube of staminate flowers short; 

Stamens attached to throat of calyx 3. Momordica 

Stamens inserted in calyx tube; 

Flowers in racemes 4. Luff a 

Flowers solitary or fasciculate; 

Calyx lobes somewhat leafy, serrate, recurved. 

5. Benincasa 
Calyx lobes subulate, entire; 

Tendrils 2-3 fid, connective short 6. Citrullus 



' Comparatively recent papers which should be consulted are: The series of articles on Cucurbits by various authors in the "Bulletin 
of Applied Botany, of Genetics and Plant-breeding," volume 23, No. 3. pp. 1-560. Leningrad 1930; and also the paper on the " Cultivated 
Plants of Mexico, Guatemala, and Colombia " by Bukasov et al. especially chapter 19 on the Cucurbitaceae i Supplement 47, to the same 
journal, 1930. 

The Russian agriculturists writing in the publications mentioned have used a system of classification and a series of Latin names (mostly 
for the purpose of designating geographic races or other groups within the various species which are, for the purposes of this account, too 
involved to warrant inclusion and explanation, although their study is bringing out facts which must be considered in a monographic study 
of the Cucurbits. 

6 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



Tendrils simple, connective produced beyond the pollen 

sacs 7. Cucumis 

Corolla campanulate; 

Anthers free 3. Sicana 

Anthers united 9. Cucurbita 

1. TRICHOSANTHES L. Sp. PL 1008. 1753 — 
Cucumeroides Gaertn. Fruct. 2:485. 1791. Invol- 
ucrnriu Ser. Mem. Soc. Phys. Gen. 3':25. 1825. 
Eopepon Naud. Ann. Sci. Nat. V. 5:31. 1866. 

Platygonia Naud. /. c. 33. — Trichosanthos St. -Lag. 

Ann. Soc. Bot. Lyon. 7:56. 1880. 

Annual or perennial herbs, monoecious or dioecious; tendrils 
-' 5. branched; rarely simple; leaves simple, entire or lobed or com- 
pound; flowers white, the pistillate solitary, the staminate sometimes 
racemose; calyx tube long cylindrical, dilated above; corolla 5-lobed 
or parted, the lobes often fimbriate; stamens 3; ovary 1 -celled with 
3 parietal placentae, style long, stigmas 3, occasionally 2; fruit fleshy 
with numerous seeds. 

There are about 50 species of this Asiatic genus of 
which only the following is of particular interest here, 
though several others are reported to have edible fruit. 

T. Aiisiuina L. Sp. PL 1008. 1753. Snake 
Gourd. Cucumis Angtrina L. Sp. PL erf. 2. 1437. 
1763. Trichosantbes colubrina Jacq. f. Eclog. t. 128. 
1844. Involucraria Anguina M. Roem. Syn. Pepon. 

97. 1846. 

Annual climbing or long-running herb: leaves deltoid- or 
broad-ovate, deeply cordate, apiculate dentate, slightly sinuate and 
sometimes shallowly 3-lobed, glabrate to glabrous, 4-9 inches long; 
flowers long-peduncled, 2 inches or more across; fruit 1—6 feet long, 
slender, more or less contorted, greenish-white, glabrous; seeds 
! _ inch long, rather thick, the edges scalloped. 

2. LAGENARIA Ser. Mem. Soc. Phys. Gen. 3 1 : 
25. 1825. 

Only one species known: 

L. siceraria 'Molina") Standi. Field Mus. Pub. 
Bot. 3:435. 1930. White-flowered Gourd. — Cucur- 
bita lagenaria L. Sp. PL 1010. 1753. C. siceraria 
Molina Sagg. Chil. 133. 1782. C. leucantha Duch. 
in Lam. Encycl. 2:150. 1786. Pepo lagenarius 
Moench, Meth. 653. 1794. Cucurbita idolatrica 
Willd. Sp. PL 4: 607. 1805. C.pyrotheca Hort. ex Steud. 
Nom. 245. 1821. Lagenaria vulgaris Ser. I. c. 25. 1825. 
Cucurbita vittata Blume, Bijdr. 932. 1826. Lagen- 
aria idolatrica Ser. in D. C. Prod. 3:299. 1828. L. 
vittata Ser. I. c. Cucumis bicirrha Forst. ex Guill. 
Zeph. Tahit. 56. 1836. Lagenaria cochinchinensis 
M. Roem. Syn. Pepon. 13. 1846. Cucurbita piri- 
formis Roem. 1. c. 89. Lagenaria microcarpa Naud. 
Rev. Hort. 65. 1855. L. verrucosa Hort. ex Gar- 
tenfl. 39:106. 1890. L. Lagenaria Cockerell, Bull. 
Torr. Club. 19:95. 1892. L. virginalis Hort. ex 
Gard. Chron. III. 11 :85. 1892. L. leucantha Rusby, 
Mem. Torr. Club. 6:53. 1896. 

Annual herbaceous vine, viscid pubescent, musky-scented, 
with branched tendrils; leaves cordate-ovate to reniform-ovate, 
sometimes shallowly lobed, apiculate-dentate, 6-12 inches across; 
flowers solitary, monoecious, rarely dioecious i white, 2-4 inches 
across; petals 5; $ flower long-petioled: anthers lightly cohering but 
not connate; ovary with 3 placentae; fruit variously shaped, many 
seeded. I 



Native to the Old World Tropics, the culture of the 
white flowered gourds has spread throughout the warm 
and temperate regions of the whole earth. While some 
forms are edible and are to be found on the markets of 
most large cities, others are grown only for the hard- 
shelled ripe fruits or gourds. These vary in size from 
3 inches to 10 or 15 times that length and in shape from 
disk-like to globular, club-shaped, bottle -shaped, anC. 
variously coiled and contorted forms. The edible types 
are easy of culture and general in distribution though the 
vegetable marrows have, because of their higher quality, 
tended to supplant the Lagenaria in many places. 

3, MOMORDICA L. Sp. PL 1009. 1753. Zucca 
Commers. ex Juss. Gen. 398. 1789. Muricia Lour. 
Fl. Cochinch. 2:596. 1790. Neurosperma \evro- 
sperma) Raf. Am. Mo. Mag. 40. 1818. Neuro- 
spermum Bartl. Ord. 275. 1830. 

Annual or perennial climbing or long-running herbaceous vines; 
leaves entire, lobed, or palmately compound with 3 to 9 leaflets; 
tendrils simple or bifid; flowers monoecious or rarely dioecious, 
yellow or occasionally white, the peduncle often furnished with large 
bracts, c? flowers solitary, racemose or corymbose, 5 solitary; corolla 
rotate to open campanulate, 5 -parted to the base, or more rarely 
5-lobate, 2 of the segments wider than the others; stamens 3, rarely 
2 or 5 by failure of the filaments to adhere); ovary with three pla- 
centae, style slender, stigmas 3 entire or bifid: fruit oblong or nearly 
spherical, often spiny tuberculate, usually indehiscent but occasion- 
ally trivalvate; seed few to many. 

Over 60 species native to the tropics of the Old 
World, of which the following two are commonly culti- 
vated in the United States bcth for ornamental use and 
the food value of the fruits. 

1. M. BalsaminaL. Sp. PL 1C09. 1753. Balsam- 
apple. Neurosperma cuspidata Raf. Journ. Phys. 
101. 1819. M. garicpensis E. Mey. ex Drege, Zwei. 

pfl.-geogr. Dok. 202. 1844. 

Annual, monoecious vine with simple tendrils; branches slender, 
glabrous, long: leaves thin, glabrous, broadly deltoid-ovate to 
cordate-orbicular in outline, 3- to 5-lobed with broad sinuses, 
acute-mucronate, 2^1 inches across; flowers orange yellow with darker 
center, f 1-1 1 i inches across with very slender long (1 J 4— 2 ! 2 inches) 
peduncles, having a serrate bract on the upper portion, 9 smaller 
with bractless short {%— J^ inch) peduncles; fruit broadly ovoid, 
1 ' 2-3 inches long, crested, tuberculate, or sometimes nearly smooth, 
orange. 

2. M. Charantia L. Sp. PL 1009. 1753. Balsam 
Pear. M. indica Stickm. Herb. Amb. 24. 1754. 
M. elegans Salisb. Prod. 158. 1796. M. anthel- 
mintica Schum. & Thonn. Beskr. Guin. PL 423. 
1827. Cucumis intermedins Roem. Syn. Pepon. 
880. 1846. M. Jagorana C. Koch, Wochenschr. 45, 
1858. M. chinensis | sinensis) Hort. ex Bull. Soc. 
Tosc. Ort. 18:14. 1893. Sicyos Fauriei Lev. in 
Fedde, Rep. Spec. Nov. 10:150. 1911. 

Somewhat similar to M. Balaamina but with larger more 
deeply lobed leaves, :~° flowers with an entire bract below the middle 
of the slender peduncle: fruit oblong or oval, 4-8 inches long, orange- 
yellow covered with blunt tubercles, dehiscent apically into 3 valves 
at maturity, then showing the scarlet arils of the numerous seeds. 

4. Ll'FFA Adans. Fam. 2:138. 1763. Turia 
Forsk. Fl. Aeg.-arab. 165. 1775. Trevouxia (Tre- 



8 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



vauxia) Scop. Intr. 152. 1777. Amordica Neck. 
Elezn. 1:241. 1790. Poppya Neck. 

Monoecious annual vines with branched tendrils; leaves 5- to 
7-lobed, rarely sub-entire; flowers yellow rarely white, rather large, 
o* racemose, 9 solitary; corolla of 5 free petals; stamens 3, rarely 
4 or 5; ovary with 3 placentae; stigmas 3, bilobate; fruit dry, oblong 
or cylindrical, the interior fibrous; seeds numerous. Of the 8 species 
known all (except one) are conceded to have originated in the 
tropics of the Old World. The one exception, L. operculata, is 
known to date only from Tropical America, but it, too, probably 
originated in the Old World. Only one species is commonly culti- 
vated in this country. 

Luffa cylindrica (L. ) M. Roem. Syn. Pepon 63. 
1846. Rag-Gourd. Momordica cylindrica L. Sp. PL 
1009. 1753. M. Luffa L. /. c. Turia cordata J. F. 
Gmel. Syst. 403. 1791. T. cylindrica J. F. Gmel. /. c. 
L. aegyptiaca Mill. Gard. Diet. ed. gall. 4:500. 1785. 
Cucumis lineatus Bosc. Journ. His. Nat. 2:251. 
1792. Momordica reticulata Salisb. Prod. 158. 1796. 
L. pentandra Roxb. Hort. Beng. 70. 1814. L. scabra 
Schum. 8s Thonn. Beskr. Guin. PL 405. 1827. 
Momordica carinata Veil. Fl. Flum. 10: t. 97. 1827. 
L. Petola and L. Cattu-Picinna Ser. in D. C. Prod. 
3:303. 1828. Byronia cheirophylla, Cucumis 
acutangulus, Luffa amara and L. hederacea Wall. 
List. 1832. L. Satpatia and L. Parvala Buch.-Ham. 
in Wall. 1. c. L. clavata and L. racemosa Roxb. 
Fl. Ind. 3:714 and 715. 1832. Cucumis pentrandus 
Roxb. ex Wight. 8s Am. Prod. 1:343. 1834. L. 
striata Schrad. Ind. sem. Gott. 1835. Cucumis 
metacarpus G. Don, Gen. Syst. 3:28. 1836. L. 
foetida Jacq. f. ex Schrad. Linnaea 12:405. 1838. 
L. Jacquinii Schrad. 1. c. L. vittata Zipp. ex Span. 
Linnaea 15:206. 1841. L. leucosperma Roem. Syn. 
Pepon. 63. 1846. L. insularum A. Gray, U. S. 
Exp. 1:644. 1854. L. sylvestris Miq. Fl. Ind. Bot. 
1:666. 1856. Poppya Fabiana K. Koch Berl. Allg. 
Gart. 60. 1857. L. leiocarpa F. Muell. Fragm. 
3:107. 1862. Karivia? longicirrha Miq. Pro/. F/. 
/ap. 12. 1866. L. Veitchii Naud. Rev. rforr. 58. 
1873. 

Stem 6 to 15 feet long, 5-angled, slender, smooth but the 
angles scabrous; leaves deltoid to nearly orbicular in outline but 
acute or acuminate at the apex, usually more or less deeply 3-7 lobed, 
dentate, scabrous; flowers yellow, 2-4 inches across, o" and 9 in the 
same leaf axils; fruit fusiform, cylindrical, or elongate-clavate, not 
ribbed but usually with light furrows and stripes, 1-2 feet long. 

Like most of the other species in the genus the fruit 
is edible when young but finds a wider use in the United 
States as an ornamental vine. The dried inner fibrous 
portion of the fruit is used as a sponge, a use which has 
given the plant such names as Rag-Gourd, Vegetable 
Sponge, and Dish-cloth Gourd. 

5. BEMNC VS\ Savi. Bibl. Ital. 9:158. 1818. 
Only one species is known, the description of which 
will include the generic characters. 



Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn. in DC. 
Mon. Phan. 3:513. 1881. Chinese Preserving Melon. 
White Gourd. Cucurbita hispida Thunb. Fl. Jap. 322. 
1784. C. pruriens Sol. ex Forst. Prod. 92:1786. 
(nomen). B. cerifera Savi 1. c. B. cylindrica Hort 
ex Ser. Mem. Phys. Gen. 3:1. 1825. Cucurbita 
villosa Blume, Bijdr. 931. 1826. C. farinosa Blume 
/. c. Lagenaria hispida Ser in DC. Prod. 3:303. 
1828. Cucurbita Camolenga Buch.-Ham. in Wall. 
Dist. 1932. C. alba Roxb. ex Wight 85 Am. Prod. 
1:344. 1834. C. Pepo-aspera Blanco Fl. Filip. 773. 
1837. C. littoralis Hassk. Car. Hort. Bogor. 190. 
1844. Gymnopetalum septemlobum Miq. Fl. Ind. 
Bot. 1:679. 1855. Lagenaria dasystemon Miq. 
Prol. FL Jap. 13. 1866. Cucurbita vacua F. Muell. 
Fragm. 6:186. 1868. B. vacua F. Muell. Cens. 
Austr. PL 76. 1882. 

Monoecious long-running annual, with branched tendrils and 
brown-hairy stems; leaves palmately veined, 5-angled, reniform- 
ovate to nearly pentagonal -orbicular, strongly cordate, hirsute or 
glabrate, apiculate dentate; flowers solitary, yellow, 3-4 inches 
across, 0* long pedunculate; y short pedunculate; petals 5, anthers 
free, ovary with 3 placentae; fruit nearly spherical to oblong; 
10-20 inches long, 4-10 inches thick, white waxy, hairy, greenish 
or marbled with white; seeds numerous. The fruit is used mostly 
in pickles and conserves. 

6. CITRULLUS 8 Fcrsk. Fl. Aeg.-arab. 167. 1775. 
Anguria Mill. Gard. Diet. abr. ed. 4. 1754. Colo- 
cynthis Ludw. Inst. Regn. Veg. ed. 2. 139. 1757. 

Monoecious or dioecious, long-running annual or perennial 
herbs with or without tendrils; leaves deeply 3-7 lobed, pinnatifid, 
roundish or deltoid-ovate in outline; flowers yellow, short peduncu- 
late, o" and 9 solitary, rarely fasciculate; sepals 5; corolla deeply 
5-parted, rotate or broad-campanulate, stamens 3, anthers free or 
lightly coherent; ovary with 3 placentae, stigmas 3, thick, somewhat 
bilobate; fruit globose or oblong, fleshy or dry, many seeded. 

Of the four species of this genus only the following 
species is of importance in America though C. Colo- 
cynthis, the colocynth, has been grown to a slight extent. 

Citrullus vulgaris Schrad. in Eckl. 8m Zeyh. 
Enum. 279. 1836. Watermelon. Cucurbita Citrul- 
lus L. Sp. PL 1010. 1753. "Citrullus battich 
of Forsk. Fl. Aeg.-arab. 167. 1775 " fide some later 
auth. Angaria Citrullus Mill. Gard. Diet. ed. 8. corr. 
1768. Cucurbita Angaria Duch. in Lam. Encycl. 
2:158. 1786. C. pinnatifida Schrank, Regensb. Syll. 
PL 1:190. 1824. Citrullus Pasteca Sag. Am. Sci. 
Nat. I. 8:312. 1826. Cucumis amarissimus Schrad. 
Ind. Sem. Gott. 1827. C. Citrullus Ser. in DC. 
Prod. 3:312. 1828. C. laciniosus Eckl. ex Schrad. 
/. c. Cucurbita caffra Eckl. 8s Zeyh. Enum. 279. 
1836. Citrullus caffer Schrad. Ind. Sem. Gott. 1834. 
Cucumis dissectus Decne. Ann. Mus. Paris 3:449. 
1834. Citrullus chodospermus Fal. & Dunal, Bull. 
Soc. Agr. Herault. 264. 1836. C. Caffrorum Schrad. 
Linnaea 12:413. 1838. C. edulis Spach. Hi'sr. Nat. 



The name Citrullus is here used as the most familiar generic term for the watermelon, despite the fact that there are two earlier 
names. The disposition of one of these names is involved in a resolution which has been referred to a committee on nomenclature appointed 
at the 1935 International Botanical Congress. Until that committee's report has been received and accepted, it seems wise to use the name 
generally used, even though it is technically invalid. The use of the specific name is. of course, also involved in the action on the generic 
name. The name here used is the one usually found in manuals, etc. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



Veg. Phan. 6:214. 1838. C. fistulosUS Stocks in 
Hook. Journ. Bot, 3:74. 1851. C. Citrullus Karat. 
Pharm. Bot. 889. 1883. Colocynthis Citrullus 
Kuntze, /?ev. Gen. 1:256. 1891. Citrullus ocdulis 
& C. COlocinthoides Pangolo, BuH. Appl. Bot. 23: 81. 
1930. 

Annual vine with hirsute long-running stems and branched 
tendrils; leaves deeply trifid with the lobes pinnatifid or bipinnatifid, 
slightly scabrous on both sides, 4-7 inches long, peduncles shorter 
than blades; flowers 1 ' & inches across, rotate, 5-lobed; fruit globular 
or oblong, glabrous, green more or less marked with white stripes 
or netting, flesh yellow, orange, or red, sweet, edible. There are 
two well marked forms: 

la. (".. vulgaris var. citroides Bailey, Gent. 
Herb. 2:186. 1930. Citron or Preserving Melon. 
Similar but fruit smaller, flesh white, solid, not edible 
raw; seeds not marbled as often as are those of the 
watermelon. 

lb. C. vulgaris var. lanatus Bailey. Gent. 
Herb. 2:87. 1929. Momordicu Umata Thunb. Prod. 
Fl. Cap. 13. 1794. Citrullus amarus Schrad. in 
Eckl. & Zeyh. Enum. PI. Air. 279. 1835. 

The bitter or wild native watermelon of South Africa. 

7. CUCUMIS L. Sp. PL 1011. 1753. Rigo- 
carpus Neck. Elem. 1:238. 1790. Hymenosicyos 
Chiov. Ann. di. Bot. 9:62. 1911. 

Annual or perennial trailing or rarely climbing herbs; monoe- 
cious, sometimes dioecious, or very rarely perfect flowered, o 1 flowers 
clustered or rarely solitary, 9 solitary or occasionally clustered; 
corolla rotate or subcampanulate, 5-parted, stamens 3, free; stami- 
nodes of the 9 flowers 3, setiform or ligulate, ovary with 3-5 
placentae and an equal number of stigmas; fruit generally fleshy, 
usually but not always indehiscent, globular to elongate, glabrous, 
pubescent or echinate; seeds numerous. 

This genus of African origin consists of nearly 40 
species, two of which are now known in a wild or semi- 
wild state only from India and one only from America. 
Besides the important edible forms which are confined 
largely to the three species distinguished in the following 
key, a fourth species, the Teasel Gourd, C. dipsaceus, 
is sometimes grown for ornamental purposes. It is a 
slender vine with leaves resembling those of C. Melo 
and dry bristly bur -like fruits about 1 ' ^ inches long. 

KEY TO IMPORTANT SPECIES OF CUCUMIS 
Fruit spiny, muricate, or echinate 

Leaves deeply lobed, sinuses obtuse .... 1. C. Anguria 
Leaves at most shallowly lobed, sinuses acute. 

Fruit edible, somewhat prickly 2. C. sativus 

Fruit inedible, bristly hairy 3. C. dipsaceus 

Fruit glabrous or pubescent, the surface smooth, ribbed, 
netted, or somewhat tuberculate but not spiny in 
any degree 4. C. .Melo 

1. Cucumis Anguria L. Sp. PL 1011. 1753. 
Bur Gherkin. C. echinatus Moench, Meth. 654. 
1794. C. parviflorus Salisb. Prod. 157. 1796. C. 
augurioides M. Roem. Syn. Pepon 79. 1846. " C. 
Arada L." Naud. & Muell. Man. Ace/. 230. 1887. 

Monoecious, trailing annual with slender, rough, hairy, angled 
stems and small tendrils; leaves deeply 3-5 lobed, the latter often 



again lobed, sinuses rounded, scabrous; flowers ' •,-';■ inch 
across, 6" fasciculate rarely solitary with slender peduncle, 9 
solitary with stouter hirsute peduncle; fruit oval or oblong, 1 ' _> 2 
inches long, pale yellow when mature, sometimes striped with 
green, furrowed, prickly. 

This species, sometimes known as the " West India 
Gherkin," is known in a seemingly wild state only from 
tropical America but as noted in the preceding chapter 
is probably of African origin. It is sometimes used in 
pickles in the United States but more often the 
" gherkins " found on the market are small fruits of 
various varieties of C. sativus. 

2. Cucumis sativus L. Sp. PL 1012. 1753. 
Cucumber. C. esculentus Salisb. Prod. 157. 1796. 
C. muricatus Willd. Sp. PL 4:613. 1805. C. Hard- 
uickii Royle, III. Himal. PL 1:220. 1839. " C. 
Vilmorinii Hort." Bull. Soc. Tosc. Ort. 19:115. 
1894. 

Monoecious annual trailing or climbing vine with angled 
hirsute stems; leaves cordate- or deltoid -ovate, more or less 3- to 
5-lobed, the sinuses acute, scabrous; flowers 1—1 J 2 inches across, c? 
clustered with slender peduncles, 9 usually solitary and with stouter 
short peduncles; fruit nearly globular to oblong or cylindrical, 
usually slightly curved, often obtusely trigonous, mature specimens 
often with very slight traces of spines or tubercles. 

The wild form considered by many as most typical is 
that described originally as C. Hardwickii from the 
mountains of northern India. Granting an African 
origin of the genus, this species must have spread early 
into Asia or possibly have developed there from a more 
generalized type. 

As a botanical variety C. sativus anglicus, Bailey 
has named the English forcing type of cucumber, note- 
worthy because of its long fruits up to 3 feet, and some- 
what larger leaves and flowers. It is not tetraploid 
despite the appearance of being so. 

The horticultural varieties of this species are treated 
in a subsequent chapter of this volume, hence it is neces- 
sary here only to remark that Seringe (DC. Prod. 3:300. 
1828) gave Latin names to five groups; Naudin (Ann. 
Sci. Nat. IV. 11:28. 1859) found four outstanding 
forms; Alefeld (Landw. Fl. 196. 1866) gave Latin 
names to 14 forms in 3 groups; and the Russian workers 
in the papers noted in footnote 7 have named still other 
forms. 

3. C. dipsaceus Ehrenb. in Spach, Hist. Veg. 
Phan. 6:211. 1838. Teasel Gourd. C. Bardona 
Fenzl. ex Naud. Ann. Sci. Nat. IV. 11:25. 1859. 
C. atnbigua Fenzl. ex Hook. f. in Oliver, Fl. Trop. 
Afr. 2:543. 1871. Momordica dasycarpa Hochst. ex 
Rich. Fl. Abyss. 1:291. 1847. 

Annual, monoecious, trailing vine; stems angled, setose; leaves 
more or less broad- or reniform-ovate, 3-4 ' 2 inches across; flowers 
small, on long, slender peduncles, i 1 solitary or fasciculate, 9 
solitary; fruit 1-2 inches long, hard, bur-like, ovoid-cylindrical, 
pale yellowish when mature, densely covered with bristly hairs; 
seeds very small, numerous. 

This plant, from north eastern Africa and adjacent 
Asia, is occasionally grown for ornament. It is some- 
times known as Hedgehog Gourd. 



10 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



4. Cucumis Melo L. Sp. PI. 1011. 1753. Melon. 
C. Ditdaim L. /. c. C. Chate Hass. It. Pal. 591. 
1751. C. flexuosus L. Sp. PA ed. 2. 1437. 1763. 
C. oft icinurum Crantz, Inst. t. 172. 1766. C.acidus 
Jacq. Ofos. Bor. 4:14. 1771. C. pictus Jacq. iAorf. 
Finrf. 3:6. 27. 1776. C. Conomon Thunb. Fl. Jap. 
324. 1784. Cucurbita aspera Sol. ex Forst. Prod. 
554. 1786. Cucumis odoratissimus Moench, Meth. 
654. 1794. C. deliciosus and C. utnbilicatus Salisb. 
Prod. 157. 1796. C. pubescens and C. maculatus 
Willd. Sp. PA 4:614. 1805. C. campechianus HBK. 
TVov. Gen. £• Sp. 2:123. 1817. C. moschatus S. F. 
Gray, War. Arr. Br. PA 2:552. 1821. C. jamaicensis 
Bert, ex Spreng. Syst. Veg. 3:46. 1826. C. persi- 
codorus Seiz, and C. serotinus Haberle ex Seiz. Verh. 
Ver. Bef. Gart. 379 and 376. 1827. Concombre 
Arada Descourt. Fl. Antill. 5:91. 1827. Cucumis 
reflexus Leyh. ex Ser. in DC. Prod. 3:300. 1828. 
C. Cantalupo Reichb. Fl. Germ. Exc. 295. 1830. 
C. Gurmia and C. Chaete Wall. Lis*. 1832. C. 
Momordica and C. utilissimus Roxb. FA /no 1 . 3:720 
and 721. 1832. Momordica sativa Roxb. ex Wight 
& Am. Prod. 1:341. 1834. Cucumis pedatifidus, 
C. Reginae and C. cubensis, Schrad. Linnaea 12:418, 
419. 1838. C. aromaticus Royle, 111. Bot. Himal. 
2:220. 1839. C. princeps Wend. And. Sem. Aforf. 
Marb. 1840. " C. bucharicus, C. Cantalon, C. 
eriranicus, C. reticularis, C. saccharinus, C. 
verrucosus, and C. viridis Hort." Steud. Nom. 451. 
1840. C. maltensis Ser. ex Steud. /. c. C. cantalu- 
pensis Haberle ex M. Roem. Syn. Pepon. 69. 1846. 
C. persicus and C. Schraderianus Roem. 1. c. 71 and 
73. Melo sativus Sag. ex Roem. 1. c. 68. Cucumis 
Chito Morren, Ann. Gand. 5:339. 1849. C. cica- 
trisatus Stocks, Journ. Bot. 4:148. 1852. C. erio- 
carpus and C. villosus Boiss. & Noe, Diagn. II. 2:59. 
1856. C. picrocarpus and C. jucunda. F. Muell. 
Trans. Pn/A Soc. V/cf. 3:46. 1859. C. Pancheri- 
anus Naud. ,4nn. ScA Nat. IV. 12:112. 1859. C. 
ambigua Fenze ex Hook. f. Fl. Trop. Air. 2:543. 
1872. C. chinensis Pangolo. Bull. Appl. Bot. 23 n :559. 
1930. 

Annual trailing vine, with soft hairy to nearly glabrous striate 
or angled stems; leaves suborbicular to nearly reniform, generally 
5-angled, occasionally very shallowly 3- to 7-lobed, soft villous to 
slightly scabrous on both sides, 3-5 inches across; flowers about 
1 inch across, monoecious or andromonoecious (the first 2 or 3 
flowers of some forms being perfect . J often fasciculate and usually 
on slender peduncles, c? and 9 usually solitary on short stout 
peduncles; corolla lobes obtuse to slightly acute; fruit various. 

The species varies a great deal and has been variously 
treated by students. A convenient but phylogenetically 
impossible) grouping places all forms first into two 
categories : 

(a) C. Melo aiirestis Naud. Ann. ScA Nat. IV. 11:73. 

1859. 
This includes the slender -vined, wild or run-wild 
types with small flowers and small inedible fruit. 

(b) C. Melo cultus Kurz. Journ. As. Soc. Beng. 

46:107. 1877. 



Here are included the stouter-vined, larger-flowered, 
larger-fruited edible types. 

The second group or category has also been variously 
treated, notably by Naudin Ann. Sci. Nat. IV. 11:34. 
1859i. His grouping is here followed as closely as 
possible for the types cultivated in the United States. 
The important forms are: 

(a) reticulatus Naud. Netted or Nutmeg Melons. 
Fruits of medium size, the surface more or less strongly 
netted, often furrowed lengthwise: rind fleshy, with 
tough skin. This group includes most of the melons 
cultivated in New York State. They are not cantaloupes 
as they are so often erroneously called. The Persian 
melons now grown in California and occasionally found 
on the eastern markets are a stronger growing, larger- 
fruited race allied to this group. 

(b) cantalupensis Naud. Cantaloupes. Fruits 
of medium size, the surface rough, warty, or scaly, but 
not netted; the rind hard. The true cantaloupes are 
not grown in this State; nor, indeed, are they grown com- 
mercially anywhere in the United States. 

(c) inodorus Naud. Winter Melons. Fruits 
smooth or rough, lacking musky odor, late ripening: 
leaves light or medium green, rather bullate, large. 
The winter melons fall into two sub-groups; the smooth 
fruited Honey Dew type and the rough fruited Cassabas. 
Few are raised in this State but many are imported from 
the Southwest. 

(d) flexuosus Naud. Snake Melon. Fruit slender 
(1-3 inches) but long ( 1 1 ■_» -3 ] 2 feet), often curved or 
coiled. Sometimes used in preserving. 

(e) Conomon Makino. Oriental Pickling Melon. 
Fruit smooth, glabrous, not musky, variously shaped. 
The name suggests its use. Rarely grown. 

(f) Chito Naud. Mango Melon or Garden Lemon. 
Fruit small, cucumber-like, sometimes used in pickling. 
The common names are sufficiently descriptive: Orange- 
Melon, Vegetable-Orange, Melon-Apple, Vine-Peach, 
etc. 

(g) Dudaim Naud. Dudaim Melon. Fruit about 
the size of the last, orange marked with rich brown, 
and very fragrant. Grown only for the ornamental 
perfumed fruit. Also known as Pomegranate -Melon, 
and Queen Anne's Pocket-Melon. 

8. SICANA Naud. Ann. ScA Nat. IV. 18:180. 
1862. 

The following is the only well-known species and its 
description will also serve for the genus. Two other 
forms, possibly varieties of the same species, have been 
noted. 

1. Sicana odifera Naud. A c. 181. Curuba or 
Cassabanana. 

Perennial herbaceous vine with angled stems and 3- to 
5-branched tendrils; leaves 5- to 9-lobed, nearly circular in outline, 
cordate, 5-12 inches across: flowers solitary, yellowish; J 1 flower 
with anthers free but connivent, ' _> inch long; J flower with 3 stami- 
nodes, 2 inches long: ovary with 3 placentae; stigmas 3, each 2-lobed; 
fruit long-oblong, 1-2 feet in length, nearly cylindrical, orange- 
crimson, with strong aroma: seeds numerous. 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



11 



The fruit is edible but the plant is more largely 
grown in the United States for its ornamental value. 

9. CUCURBITA L. Sp. PI. 1010. 1753. Pepo 
Adans. Fam. 2:138. 1763. Ozodycus Raf. Atlant. 
Journ. 145. 1832. Sphetumtha Schrad. Linnaea 
12:416. 1838. Pileocalyx Gaspar. Rendic. Acad. 
Sci. Nap. 6:409. 1847. Tristcmon Scheele, Linnaea 
21:586. 1848. 

Annual or perennial herbs with long-running, climbing, or 
short and bushy through shortening of the nodes 1 , more or less 
coarse-prickly angled or furrowed stems often rooting at the nodes; 
tendrils branched; leaves usually simple, shallowly to deeply lobed, 
occasionally palmately compound or nearly so, scabrous or pubescent, 
rarely glabrate: flowers normally monoecious, large, creamy-white 
to deep yellow, both calyx and corolla usually campanulate, normally 
5 lobed; 0* solitary or fasciculate, long-pedunculate, stamens usually 
3. the anthers united — one unilocular and the others bilocular, 
sigmoid-flexuous, the filaments at least partly free: 5 solitary, 
short -peduncled, staminoidia 3; ovary oblong or discoid, unilocular 
with 3 to 5 placentae, style short thick, stigmas 3 to 5 and bilobate; 
fruit fleshy or fibrous, indehiscent, seeds numerous, flat, smooth, 
generally white or buffy but in some species black, grayish or brown, 
ovate to oblong or nearly elliptic, the margin more or less thickened. 

An American genus of tropical origin composed of the following 
species. 

KEY TO THE KNOWN SPECIES OF CUCURBITA 

Plants perennial: 

Leaves narrowly triangular, entire to shallowly-lobed, 

truncate or nearly so at the base. 

Calyx tube less than : _> inch long, segments nearly 

2 inches long: the corolla slightly exceeding the 

calyx segments: leaves thin, green. 1. C. Galoot lii 

Calyx tube more than s 4 inch long, segments some- 
what shorter: the corolla about 3 inches long; 
leaves thick ashy-green; fruit 3-celled. 

2. C. foetidissima 

Leaves suborbicular to ovate in outline, more or less 

deeply lobed, the basal sinus generally deep. 

Calyx tube long, narrowly sub-cylindric : leaves 

ashy-green; fruit 5-celled. 

Lobes of leaves deltoid, the sinuses reaching about 

halfway to the base 3. C. palmata 

Lobes of leaves nearly linear, the sinuses reaching 
nearly or quite to the base 4. C. digitata 

Calyx tube short, campanulate; leaves pale or clear 
green above, not ashy: fruit 3-celled. 
Lobes of leaves acute: fruit small, 2 to 3 inches in 
diameter 5. C. radicans 

Lobes of leaves rounded: fruit large, 4 to 6 inches 

in diameter 6. C. ficifolia 

Plants annual: 

Flowers creamy white: slender climbing vine. 

7. C. okeechobeensis 

Flowers yellow; stout trailing vines or sometimes bush". 
Lower veins of leaf covered by prominently decurrent 
blade to point of union with the petiole. 

8. C. moschata 

Lower veins of leaf naked near junction with petiole. 
Seeds small, less than \4 incn kmg: black. 

9. C. Andreana 



Seeds larger, more than ' 4 inch long, white, 

tawny or grayish. 

Fruit stalk hard, ridged, pentagonal; leaves 

usually angled or deeply lobed; setae usually 

large and stiff 10. C. Pepo 

Fruit stalk more or less spongy, nearly cylindri- 
cal; leaves rounded, occasionally lobed but 
not angulate; setae generally small and often 
interspersed with soft hairs. . 11. ('.. maxima 

1. Cucurbita Galeottii Cogn. in DC. Mon. 
Phan. 3:551. 1881. 

Perennial vine with thick angular somewhat bristly stems; 
leaves narrowly triangular lightly lobed, acute at the apex and 
truncate or nearly so at the base, deep green above, ashy green 
below, hirsute, sparingly so above and becoming glabrate, more 
densely so below, the nerves prickly, 5-7 inches long; flowers small; 
calyx tube narrowly campanulate less than ' ■> inch long with sub- 
ulate lobes slightly dilate at the apex up to 2 inches long; corolla 
slightly longer than the calyx lobes; fruit unknown. 

2. Cucurbita foetidissima H. B. K. Nov. Gen. & 
Spec. 2:123. 1817. Calabazilla. Ozodycus perennis 

Raf. Atl. Journ. 145. 1832. Cuciimis perennis 
James, in Long's Exp. Rocky Mrs. 2:20. 1823. 
Cucurbita perennis A. Gray. PI. Lindh. 2:193. 
1850. Pepo foetidissima Britton III. Fl. ed. 2 3:291. 
1913. 

Perennial long-running vine with stout subcylindric stems 
reaching 15-20 feet in length; leaves triangular-ovate, cordate or 
truncate ^t base, acute at apex, somewhat ashy above and canescent 
below, 4—10 inches long; flowers solitary, rather large; calyx tube 
about 3 4 inch long, lobes very narrow and slightly shorter than the 
tube; corolla 3—4 inches long; fruit 3-4 inches in diameter nearly 
globular. 

Native to Northern Mexico and the Southwestern 
United States. The leaves were used medicinally by 
the Spanish and the carrot -shaped root is said to have 
been employed as a cleanser. 

3. Cucurbita palmata S. Wats. Proc. Am. Acad. 
11:137. 1876. Coyote Melon or Mock Orange. C. 
californica Torr. ex Wats. 1. c. 138. 

Perennial trailing vine with slender sulcate steins several feet 
long; leaves nearly suborbicular in outline palmately 5-cleft, ashy 
green above and canescent below, more or less densely short hirsute, 
3— 4'o inches across; calyx tube of z flower 1 inch or less in length, 
the narrow teeth or lobes slightly shorter; corolla l'i to nearly 
3 inches long; fruit 5-celled, about 3 inches long, nearly globular, 
the peduncle with thickened ridges. 

Native to southern California and possibly adjacent 
Nevada and Arizona. C. californica appears to be 
but an extreme form with no characters to separate it 
from the preceding species except the smaller size of its 
parts. 

4. Cucurbita digitata. A. Gray, PI. Wrighti- 
anae 2:60. 1853. 

Perennial trailing vine with slender obtusely angular stems 
often rooting at the nodes; leaves suborbicular in outline but pal- 
mately cleft nearly to the base into 3-5 sublinear segments; leaves 
green and sparsely hirsute above, ashy green and more or less densely 
short hirsute below. 5-8 inches across: calyx tube of f flower about 



12 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



\Yl inches long, the subulate teeth less than J ■> inch long; corolla 
2-3 inches long; fruit 5-celled, nearly globular 2-4 inches in diameter. 

Native to Arizona and New Mexico. This is 
closely allied to the preceding species and differs chiefly 
in the form of the leaves. 

5. Cucurbita radicans Naud. Ann. Sci. Nat. 
V. 6:8. 1866. Sphenantha scabra Schrad. Linnaea 
12:416. 1838. (Not C. scabra Blume 1823.) " S. 
scandens Schrad " Steud. Nom. ed. 2. 2:621. 1841. 
sphalm. 

Perennial long-running vine with rather slender terete hirsute 
stems; leaves cordate-ovate in outline, rather deeply 3- to 7-lobed, 
the lobes often acute but the sinus rounded, medium green and 
rough above sometimes marbled with white, paler and more or less 
hirsute beneath; calyx tube narrowly campanulate about •' , s inch 
long, the lobes narrow subulate ] ■> inch or less in length, corolla 
2 1 j 2' L . inches long, the lobes acute; fruit 3-5 inches long, nearly 
globular, seeds ;! f^- 1 2 inch long, half as broad, thin. 

Native to Mexico, and thus far of botanical interest 
only. In appearance it suggests some forms of the yellow 
flowered gourds, C. Pepo ovifera. 

6. Cucurbita fici folia Bouche, Verh. Ver. Gar- 
tenb. Berlin 12:205. 1837. Malabar Gourd. Pepo 
malabaricus Sageret, Ann. Sci. Nat. I. 8:312. 1826. 
C. melanosperma Al. Br. (Car. Hort. Karls. 1824. 
nomen) ex Gaspar. in Rendic Acad. Sci. Nap. 6:448. 
1847. Pepo ficifolia Britton TV. Y. Acad. Sci. 6:266. 
1925. 

Perennial long-running vine with stout setose stems becoming 
somewhat woody; leaves reniform to suborbicular in outline, 7-10 
inches across, pinnate to 5-lobate, the sinuses occasionally extend- 
ing one-half way to the base of the blade, petioles stout, striate; 
flowers about 3 inches across, calyx tube short and lobes short and 
slender, corolla broad campanulate with spreading lobes; fruit 
nearly globular to oblong, 6-12 inches in length, green with white 
stripes, the peduncle expanded somewhat at point of attachment, 
seeds black or blackish brown (fuscous), occasionally white, about 
3 4 inch long. 

Widely distributed from Mexico to Chile. The 
name, Malabar gourd, is a misnomer, as Sageret recog- 
nized though he inconsistently called the plant Pepo 
malabaricus. It is native to tropical America but is 
widely distributed in the Old World. It is noteworthy 
that the Russian explorers have found white-seeded forms 
as reported in the publications noted at the beginning 
of this chapter. 

7. Cucurbita okeechobeensis Bailey. Genf. 
Herb. 2:179. Oct. 1930. Okeechobee Gourd. Pepo 
okeechobeensis Small, Journ. N. Y. Bot. Gard. 
31'-:12:Jan. 1930. 

Annual climbing vine, with short hirsute slender stems becom- 
ing glabrate; leaves suborbicular to reniform in outline, more or 
less cordate at base, shallowly 5—7 angle-lobed, green slightly paler 
and more or less pubescent beneath; flowers whitish or light cream, 
calyx tube of :" flowers campanulate about ) •_> inch long with 
narrow lobes less than '4 inch long; corolla about 3 inches long, 
the lobes mucronate; fruit nearly globular about 3 inches long, 
smooth bright green with white or darker green spots. 

Native of Florida, a very distinct species described 
in more detail in the references cited above. 



8. Cucurbita moschata Duch. in Poir. Diet. 
Sci. Nat. 11:234. 1818. Fall and Winter squashes 
and pumpkins. C. Pepo moschata Duch. in Lam. 
Encycl. 2:152. 1786. Pepo moschatus and P. 
eximius Sag. Ann. Sci. Nat. I. 8:312. 1826. Cucur- 
bita spathularis Schrad. Linnaea 12:406. 1838. 
(fide Kew Ind.) C. macrocarpa Gasp. Rendic. 
Acad. Sci. Nap. 6:447. 1847. C. hippopera Ser. 
Fl. Jard. & Cult. 2:531. 1847. Gymnopetalum 
calyculatum Miq. Fl. Ind. Bot. Suppl. 1:332. 1860. 
Cucurbita melonaeformis Carr. Rev. Hort. 52. 137. 
1880. C. Pepo var. melonaeformis Mak. Tokyo Bot. 
Mag. 22 s :47. 1908. C. mixta. Pang. Bull. App. 
Bot. 23>:258 & 264. 1930. 

Annual long-running vine with stems generally soft hairy 
especially at the tips; leaves broad-ovate to suborbicular in outline, 
the lamina decurrent on the basal veins to the point of attachment, 
usually shallowly lobed and more or less marked with white blotches; 
flowers large yellow, calyx lobes often expanded foliaceous, corolla 
lobes broadly spreading, usually neither as acute as those of C. Pepo 
nor so obtuse as those of C. maxima; anther column about the 
same length as the filaments and usually much contorted; fruit 
various, the peduncle either hard and obtusely ridged somewhat as 
in C. Pepo or fleshy and subcylindrical as in C. maxima, often 
expanded at the point of attachment to the fruit. 

Apparently of Central American origin but spreading 
to both North and South America. The Seminole 
pumpkins of Florida are true C. moschata. Cucurbita 
mixta (which was recently described in Russia from 
Central American material) falls we'll into the range of 
variation shown by cultivated varieties differing only 
in the woodiness of the fruit shell, though various 
cultivated varieties become very woody in storage. It 
may represent more primitive forms. The variety 
cyanoperizona has seeds closely resembling those of the 
cultivated " Charles Naudin " variety and the variety 
stenosperma seems to be matched by several cultivated 
forms in the United States. The photographs and 
drawings published with the description fail to show any 
characters by which the fruits, flowers, or foliage may be 
differentiated from the widely varying forms of C. 
moschata as already known. The cultivated forms 
of importance are treated at length in a succeeding 
chapter. 

9. Cucurbita Andreana Naud. Rev. Hort. 68:542. 
1896. 

Annual long-running vine, with striate, bristly stems rooting 
at the nodes, up to 70-80 feet long; leaves more or less 3-lobed, 
the central lobe acutish, the blade often marbled with white, the 
petioles long and setose; flowers monoecious, the calyx with linear 
acute lobes about half the length of the bright yellow corolla which 
is up to 3 or 3*2 inches long, the lobes acute, pistil and stamens 
apparently similar to those of C. moschata. fruit small, generally 
from 3-6 inches long, though occasionally larger obovoid, greenish 
with white longitudinal stripes, flesh bitter, the peduncle ridged and 
somewhat pentagonal; seeds black or nearly so, numerous, about 
}i inch long or less. 



Native of Uruguay and Argentina, 
many years — in North America at least 



Known for 
- only from 

the original description and a few seedlings raised from 
the original plant which fruited in France. Archevelata's 



SYSTEMATIC BOTANY OF THE CULTIVATED CUCURBITS 



13 



description in his Flora Uruguay 2:143, 1905, and the 
discussion by Parodi in his paper on pre-Hispanic agri- 
culture i-n Argentina,'-' render this plant of interest as a 
possible wild type of C. maxima. The mottling of 
leaves is known to us, however, only in C. Pepo and 
C. moschata. 

10. Cucurbits Pepo L. Sp. PL 1010. 1753. 
Pumpkin, Summer Squash. — C. verrucosa and C. 
Melopepo L. /. c. C. mammeata Molina, Sagg. 
Chili. 133. 1782. C. Pepo polymorpha Duch. in 
Lam. Encycl. 2:152. 1786. Pt'po vulgaris, P. ver- 
rucosus, and P. Melopepo Moench, Meth. 653. 1794. 
Cucurbita fastuosa Salisb. Prod. 157. 1796. C. 
subverrucosa Willd. Sp. P7. 4:609. 1805. C. escu- 
lenta S. F. Gray, War. Arr. Br. PL 2:552. 1821. 
C. Courgero Ser. Mem. Soc. ffisr. TVar. Gen. 3 2 :t. 1. 

1825. Pepo Citrullus Sag. y4nn. Sci. Nat. I. 9:311. 

1826. Cucurbita venosa Descourt. FL Antill. 5:79. 

1827. C. clodiensis Nacc. FL Ven. 5:52. 1828. 
C. maxima ■) Courgero Ser. in D. C. Prod. 3:316. 

1828. C. Oblonga Link, Handb. 1:643. 1829. C. 
pileoformis Roem. Syn. Pepon. 86. 1846. 

(C. asteroides, cucumifera, elongata, tuberculosa and 
urnigera Schrad. Ind. Sem. Gott. and in Linnaea 10:12. 1836 
and 1838, are names only or names with inadequate descriptions 
which are generally considered as synonyms of C. Pepo. Cucumis 
Zapallo and Cucurbita radiata Steud. Nom. ed. 2. 452. 1840, 
are likewise herbarium names usually associated with this species. 
Cucurbita succado Naeg., C. hybrida Bertol., and the following 
garden names, C. aurantiformis, C. tricolor, C. bicorporea, 
C. coronata, C. marsupiiformis, C. pyriformis, C. stellata. 
C. turbinata and C. variegata are listed by Naudin, Ann. Sci. 
Nat. VI. 6:129. 1856, as also applying here. In addition to the 
names cited above a large number of Latin names were used by 
Alefeld. Landw. FL 1866.) 

Annual erect or trailing plants with prickly, or occasionally 
soft hairy angled or grooved stems; leaves angular lobed or deep'y 
cut, green, occasionally marbled with white and rarely silvered over 
the entire surface, the lower veins more or less naked near the point 
of attachment to petiole; flowers bright yellow to orange-yellow, 
corolla lobes acute; anther column slender, straight and slightly 
exceeding the length of the filaments; fruit shape various, the 
peduncle hard and more or less strongly ridged; seeds more or less 
light buffy or pale tan. 

Native to America and highly variable. Numerous 
attempts have been made to make a botanical classifica- 
tion of the horticultural groups but none are successful 
because of the intergradation of characters. The small 
yellow-flowered gourds noted below are fairly distinct; 
otherwise no criteria are available for the taxonomic 
segregation of the various groups. 

The scallops, patty pans or cumlings are the type of 
C. Melopepo and of the form clypeiformis; the crook- 
necks were classified as the form torticollis by Alefeld. 
Bailey united both these groups under the name var. 
condensa and later amended Alefeld's C. Pepo Melo- 
pepo to include them. This grouping depends mainly 
on two characters — the short nodes and consequent 
bushy type of plant and the edibility of the fruit before 
maturity. However, there are vining types which reach j 



their optimum stage of edibility before maturity and the 
writer has bred long-running types of crooknecks (short- 
running specimens are not rare) ; and a long-running 
scallop is also known. The vegetable marrows were 
named var. medullosa by Alefeld but intergrading 
types render such segregation valueless taxonomically. 
Arbitrary horticultural groupings with non -Latin names 
seem to the writer to be the only reasonable method of 
segregating these forms. Such a classification is made 
in a succeeding chapter. 

The only distinct group of variants of taxonomic 
significance seems to be : 

10a. C. Pepo ovifera Alef. Landw. FL 224. 1866. 
Yellow flowered Gourd. C. ovifera L. Mant. 126. 
1767. C. aurantia Willd. Sp. PL 4:609. 1805. C. 
pyxidaris DC. FL Fr. 3:693. 1815. Pepo pyridaris 
Poir. Diet. Sci. Nat. 8:237. 1818. Cucurbita 
ceratoceras Haberle in Spix & Mart. Reise 1:536. 
1823. C. pomiformis Roem. Syn. Pepon. 85. 1846. 
C. grisea Roem. /. c. 86. Tristemon texanum 
Scheele, Linnaea 21:586. 1848. Cucurbita texana 
A. Gray. PL Lindh. 2:193. 1850. 

More slender vines with generally thinner, smaller and less 
abundant foliage than in the species; fruits small, hard-shelled, bitter 
and inedible, of various shapes and markings. 

The names Apple, Pear, Orange, Nest-egg, Bishop's 
Mitre, etc., suggest some of the forms and colors that 
render these fruits attractive and popular ornamentals. 

11. Cucurbita maxima Duch. in Lam. Encycl. 
2:151. 1786. Fall and Winter Squashes and Pumpkins. 
C. Potiro Pers. Syn. PL 2:593. 1807. Pepo Potiro 
Sag. Ann. Sci. Nat. I. 8:311. 1826. Cucurbita 
maxima a Potiro and (3 viridis Ser. in DC. Prod. 3:316. 
1828. Pepo maximus Peterm. FL Lips. Excurs. 562. 
1838. P. macrocarpus Rich, ex Spach. Veg. Phan. 
6:202. 1838. Cucurbita Farinae Mozz. ex Naud. 
Ann. Sci. Nat. IV. 6:17. 1856. C. maxima sylvestris 
Naud. 1. c. C. Rapallito Carr. Rev. Hort. (1872) 399. 
1873. Cucumis Rapallito Carr. L c. 

Annual generally long-running but occasionally short-running 
vines (rarely bushy plants), with slightly ridged or striate stems 
somewhat bristly-hirsute or sparingly setaceous; leaves green, 
orbicular or nearly so, usually sinuate-margined (rarely lobed, the 
lobes then rounded or very obtuse); margins soft mucronate, the 
basal veins naked for an inch or more from point of attachment to 
petiole; flowers light to deep yellow; calyx lobes short and narrow; 
corolla lobes usually somewhat reflexed, crenate-sinuate, very 
obtuse, anther column obtuse, much longer than filaments, slightly 
contorted; fruits top-shaped, globular, oblong, or flattened cylin- 
dric, not heavily ridged; fruit stalk more or less spongy and cylin- 
drical; seeds usually clear white or fawn-colored, apex ordinarily 
oblique. 

Native of South America and possibly derived from 
a form similar to C. Andreana. While this species 
is not as variable as C. Pepo, there are several horticul- 
tural groups; and one, the following, which possibly merits 
taxonomic status. 



'See Anales de la Academia Nacional de Agronomia y Veterinaria de Buenos Aires. 1:142. 1935. 



14 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



11a. C. maxima turbaniformis Alef. Landw. Fl. 
212. 1866. Turban Squashes. C. Turbaniformis 
Roem. Syn. Pepon. 87. 1846. Pileocalyx elegans 
Gaspar. Rendic. Acad. Sci. Nap. 6:409. 1847. 

Fruit often 5-ceIled and with projecting portion known as the 
"Acorn." It may be questioned whether this form merits a botanical 
designation in view of the fact that a somewhat similarly formed 
fruit occurs among the yellow-flowered gourds, C. Pepo ovifera. 



Certainly the writer would object to proposing a new name but 
inasmuch as these turban forms have recently been again accorded 
specific rank by Rangolo and since there seem to be few intermediate 
forms known at present between the turbans and the other maximas, 
it may well stand as a subordinate group of the species under a name 
already well known. 

The horticultural varieties are considered in detail 
in a succeeding chapter. 



CHAPTER III 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



Although several earlier writers referred to a few 
varieties of Cucurbita, the first comprehensive publica- 
tion dealing with a discussion of varieties was the 
" Description des Plantes Potageres " by Vilmorin- 
Andrieux et Cie, in 1856. This was revised once in 
1883 and again in 1909, in neither edition of which was 
there any classification used. In 1863 Fearing Burr, Jr., 
published his " Field and Garden Vegetables of America," 
which was almost entirely devoted to the discussion of 
varieties. It was not until 1887, however, that the first 
and only horticultural classification based on plant char- 
acters of the varieties of Cucurbita maxima, C. Pepo, 
and C. moschata was made. This materialized after 
several years trials by Sturtevant and Goff, early 
investigators at this Station. In their work the bases 
for separation were leaf shape, degree of stem groov- 
ing and expansion at the base, and fruit shape. Dur- 
ing the first 30 years in the development of the Agri- 
cultural Experiment Stations, a portion of the time 
was devoted to variety trials of vegetables; and, as 
a result, a great many brief and tabulated accounts 
of variety trials were included in the publications 
issued from the various stations. In 1927 Castetter 
and Erwin (33) grouped all varieties grown in the 
United States as either pumpkins or squashes. Pump- 
kins, in their arrangement, included the varieties of 
Cucurbita Pepo and C. moschata, each of which 
was further divided into horticultural type groups, 
namely, Connecticut Field, Cheese, Cushaw, Fordhook, 
Patty Pan, Crookneck and Vegetable Marrow; while 
the squashes included all varieties of C. maxima which 
were similarly assigned as belonging to Banana, Hub- 
bard, Turban or Mammoth groups. Except for an 
account of Australian varieties written by Darragh in 
1932, the foregoing brief review covers the important 
literature relating to varieties of Cucurbita. 

CUCURBITA MAXIMA 
The indiscriminate use cf the words squash and 
pumpkin by early authors as well as the more modern 
writers, as noted in the first chapter, has resulted in 
considerable confusion to horticulturists. Not only has 
this situation been a source of misunderstanding to 
present day gardeners and seedsmen but to the historians 
and early explorers, the latter often having used names 
which could have been applied to melons, cucumbers, 
gourds, or the three economic species of Cucurbita. 
At the present time squash is a name applied to certain 
varieties of all three species but more specifically to most 
varieties of C. maxima and the summer and early fall 
varieties of C. Pepo. Pumpkin is used to denote the 
long keeping varieties of C. Pepo, most varieties of 
C. moschata and an occasional sort of C. maxima. 



The use of these terms is in many cases exactly reversed 
in other areas. 

Of the three species to be discussed in this chapter, 
Cucurbita maxima represents the most modern intro- 
duction in the history of our agriculture, since the earliest 
records concern C. Pepo and C. moschata. The 
varieties of C. maxima are now believed to have 
originated in South America, probably Peru or Chili. 
The first authentic reports of this sort among our early 
colonists are those of Acorn, probably a turban sort, 
listed by Russell in 1827, and Valparaiso, listed by 
Thorburn in 1828. Although there is some evidence to 
indicate the existence of the forerunner of Hubbard in 
1798 in Marblehead, Massachusetts, the several versions 
of Hubbard*s origin render this theory somewhat 
dubious. About 1830 two other types, the French 
Turban and the Autumnal Marrow, were known to have 
existed; and shortly afterwards the Mammoth and a 
sort called Cocoa-nut were known. About 1842, the 
squash which was later to be known as the Hubbard 
was brought to the attention of James J. H. Gregory, 
a prominent and successful market gardener of Marble- 
head, Massachusetts, and it was due to the public interest 
in this variety that Mr. Gregory embarked upon the 
career of a seedsman, a vocation for which he has long 
been known. The period from 1860 to 1880 saw little 
increase in new varieties, although at this time Marble- 
head and American Turban were introduced. From 1880 
to 1890 the greatest activity in the introduction of new 
winter squash varieties was recorded when some 20 dis- 
tinct sorts were brought forth. Many of these fell by the 
wayside before 1910, after which such varieties as Blue 
Hubbard, Quality, Golden Delicious, Buttercup and 
Brighton were developed. 

The nature and use of the varieties in this group is 
exceedingly diverse. The fruits range in size from the 
very small Buttercup to the enormous Mammoth, and 
likewise exhibit similar diversity in plant growth, as 
exemplified by the bush-like nature of the Tree squash 
in comparison to the exceedingly vigorous 25 to 30 foot 
runners produced by Queensland Blue and others of the 
Australian group. The maximas include varieties adapted 
for different uses. Hubbard and Delicious represent 
the group especially good for baking, Boston Marrow, 
Golden Delicious and Etampes for the manufacture of 
pie stock, while Mammoth is considered best for stock 
food and exhibition purposes. 

Fifty-two distinct sorts are to be discussed in this 
publication. A great many more names are included, 
most of which are either synonyms or names of obscure 
varieties about which available information is exceed- 
ingly meager. For the most part, varieties of other 
countries are not treated other than to cite references 
which include a discussion of them. 



15 



16 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Alligator. Refs. 33, 40, 41, 129. Syn. New Alligator. 

A sport from Banana, this elongated winter squash 
was named and introduced by S. M. Isbell & Co. in 
1926. The first selection was made in 1923 by a grower 
in Jackson County, Michigan. 

The fruits of this variety resemble to some extent 
those of Winnebago. They are long and comparatively 
slender, 18-24 x 5-7 inches, weigh 15 18 pounds, and 
are nearly cylindrical, tapering somewhat at both ends. 
The skin is very dark green (dull greenish black), 
the surface rough, bumpy, and somewhat corrugated, 
and the flesh is hard, firm, has a fine texture, is 
moderately dry and is deep yellow in color. 

American Turban. Refs. 7, 11, 14, 37, 41, 48, 50, 

54, 59, 64, 73, 89, 100, 101, 128, 129, 130, 132, 
134, 137. Syns. Bishops Head, Turks Cap. 

The American Turban when introduced about 1869 
was said to have come from a combination of Hubbard, 
Autumnal Marrow, Acorn and French Turban. The 
shape and color of the fruits indicate that it probably 
came from a cross between French Turban and Autumnal 
Marrow. This variety became one of the leading sorts 
of the last century but of late years other varieties 
have replaced it. 

Apparently the chief difference between this and 
Essex Hybrid was in color of the skin, that of American 
Turban being distinctly more salmon tinted. 

Plant trailing: vines, foliage and flowers much the same as 
those of Essex Hybrid. 

Fruit small; 6-7 x 9-10 inches; weight 9-10 pounds. Shape 
drum-like, flattened at base and apex; surface moderately smooth, 
slightly uneven and bumpy; acorn, 4—5 inches in diameter, slightly 
protuberant. Skin color dull salmon orange (ochraceous salmon) 
with the blossom scar or acorn variously colored with pink, pale 
greenish blue and orange. Shell hard and medium thick, ' ., inch. 
Flesh thick at the base, 1 ' •> inches, gradually thinner towards the 
apex, orange color; texture moderately fine, rather moist, tender. 

Ankara. Refs. 33, 41, 73. 

Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore, Museum of Anthropology, 
University of Michigan, found this squash under culti- 
vation by the Indians in North Dakota. The variety 
is unique because at the time of its discovery it was 
apparently the only maxima grown by the Arikaras on 
the Ft. Berthold reservation. It was given the tribal 
name Arikara by Oscar H. Will 8s Co., of Bismarck, 
North Dakota, at the time of its introduction in 1920. 
This squash may well be considered a member of the 
Hubbard group in both shape and keeping qualities. 
Because of its performance when grown under drouth 
conditions, it is of great value to the Northern Plains 
region. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 110 days, 
which was 5 days earlier than Hubbard, in season with 
Kitchenette and Golden Hubbard and 10 days later 
than Boston Marrow. The vines are considerably less 
vigorous than those of the Hubbard with the flowers 
larger and more deeply cut between the petals. The 
fruits are smaller, somewhat similar in shape, but lack 
the curvature at the base and apex of the Hubbard 
variety. 



Plant trailing; vines slender, moderately weak, 7-8 feet; 
branches few, basal. Cotyledons long and broad, 3 ' ■> x 2 > 4 inches; 
long oval; apex tapered; color medium green. Leaves small, 9 x 13 
inches; moderately lobed; sinuses narrow, somewhat acute at the 
base; margin slightly serrated near the base, otherwise denticulate, 
distinctly frilled; surface smooth; color medium green. Flower — 
pistillate, moderately large, 6 1 ■> inches across; corolla yellow, deeply 
cut with margins moderately frilled; ovary fusiform; stigma lemon 
yellow; sepals very short and slender, :; y inch; — staminate, medium 
size, 5 inches across; sepals moderately short and very slender, 
?4 inch; pedicle short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit small, 9-10 x 8-9 inches; weight 6-8 pounds. Shape 
abruptly tapered fusiform with the medial nearly globular; ribbed 
widely; furrows shallow; surface shallowly wrinkled and ridged, 
occasionally somewhat pock-marked; blossom scar with button 
J 4 inch long. Skin color pale salmon pink light ochraceous salmon 
to salmon buff) with the extreme apex irregularly streaked for 
1-1 ' 2 inches toward the medial with pale bluish green igraphalium 
green to olive gray); other areas occasionally blotched similarly. 
Fruit stalk moderately short, 2-2 > 2 inches, round, slightly curved, 
rough and corky. Shell hard and thin, fg inch. Flesh moderately 
thin, 3 4-l inch, thickest at base; texture moderately fine, tender, 
moderately moist and soft; flavor lacking, faintly sweet; quality 
poor; color deep yellow (deep chrome), often variable within the 
same specimen. Seed cavity large, contains much placental tissue 
which is moist, stringy, often chunky, tender and easily removed. 

Seed medium large, medium long and broad, medium plump, 
1.9 x 1.2 x .33 cm. (88 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy white; margin 
rounded, smooth. 

Atlas. Refs. 33, 41, 73, 129, 130. Syn. New Atlas. 

The Atlas is a selection from Mammoth Chile 
introduced by the Iowa Seed Co. in 1898. Since it 
was never grown at Geneva, information concerning it 
has very largely been secured from Castetter and Erwin. 

Fruit large, 21 x 13 inches; weight 35 pounds. Shape variable, 
usually ovate, ribbed broadly; furrowed rather shallow; surface 
smooth, skin color glossy, reddish yellow. Shell soft; flesh coarse, 
moist, slightly sweet, dull yellow; quality fair. 

Banana. Refs. 14, 33, 41, 73, 122, 129, 130. Syns. 
Mexican Banana, Plymouth Rock. 

Banana was first offered by several seed houses 
about 1893 but the variety never became a leading 
sort at least on eastern markets. It was first listed as 
Mexican Banana and is occasionally so listed today. 
The original stock often showed some slight striping 
of a light orange tinge. H. L. Musser of Aggeler 8s 
Musser Co., Los Angeles, California, made selection to 
separate the darker blue or gray type and the yellow 
and orange pink fruits. Both the blue or gray Banana 
and Pink Banana are now listed by some Pacific Coast 
seedsmen where this variety is of commercial importance. 

One hundred and twenty-five days were required 
to mature fruits of this variety at Geneva. This was 
in season with Essex Hybrid and Victor and five days 
later than Mammoth Whale and Winnebago. The vines 
are about as vigorous as those of Hubbard and slightly 
less vigorous than those of Mammoth Whale. The 
flowers are decidedly less velvety, less pubescent and 
with margins less curved than those of Mammoth Whale. 
The fruits are similar in shape to those of Winnebago 
but are smoother and lighter in color. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet long; extreme basal portion very dark green, remainder 
moderately light green; branches moderately many, basal. Coty- 



I 



(One-half natural size) 



BANANA 




(Two-th:rds natura 



BOSTON MARROW 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



17 



ledons moderately long and broad, 2' ! | x 2 inches; short oval to 
nearly round; apex tapered. Leaves nearly entire, small, 9 x 13 
inches; margin slightly serrate near the base, otherwise denticulate, 
slightly frilled; color dull medium green; petiole moderately long, 
1518 inches and moderately slender. Flower — pistillate, medium 
size, S ' _'-6 inches across, pale orange yellow; ovary nearly cylindrical; 
sepals short and very slender. 1 1 ' t inches; staminate moderately 
small, 4— } ' _■ inches across; sepals short and very slender, ;l ( - 7 s inch. 

Fruit large, 18-20 x 5-6 inches; weight 10-12 pounds. Shape 
nearly cylindrical and moderately tapering at base and apex; 
surface moderately smooth to obscurely wrinkled and pock-marked. 
Blossom scar with button prominent. ' _■ ■ '■ ( inch long. Skin color 
gTay court gray to pale olive gray), changing to creamy pink 
pale ochraceous buff' in storage. Fruit stalk moderately short, 
1-2 inches, round, straight, soft and corky. Shell medium hardness, 
inch thick. Flesh medium thickness, 1-1 '4 inches, slightly 
thicker at the base and apex; texture very fine, moderately dry, 
tender; quality moderately good; color orange yellow (light orange 
yellow to orange buff . Seed cavity large, conforms to general 
shape of the fruit, contains much placental tissue which is slightly 
stringy but easily removed. 

Seed medium large, medium length and width, plump, 1.8 x 1.0 
x .44 cm. 144 per oz. ; face smooth, brown .dark fawn 1 ; margin 
slightly ridged, corky cream buff 1 in color. 

Bay Stat.-. Refs. 14, 23, 27, 31, 33, 38, 41, 47, 50, 51, 
59, 61, 64, 73, 98, 99, 118, 129, 130, 135. Syn. 
Improved Bay State. 

This variety similar in shape to Essex Hybrid was 
introduced by Aaron Low, seedsman, in 1888. A single 
plant bearing turban-shaped squashes of a slate gray 
instead of the usual orange was found by Mr. Low and 
the strain perpetuated by selection. It is quite possible 
that this odd plant found in a field of Essex Hybrid 
was only a different form from the original chance 
cross that produced the Essex. 

Bay State required 115 days to reach maturity at 
Geneva. This was 10 days earlier than Essex Hybrid 
and Victor and in season with Hubbard and Marblehead. 
The vines are more vigorous than those of Essex Hybrid, 
and the pistillate flowers have more greenish yellow 
ovaries and longer and heavier sepals. The fruits are 
smaller, but similar in shape to Essex Hybrid, with a 
somewhat less prominent blossom scar. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately heavy, vigorous, 15-18 feet 
long; branches many, basal. Cotyledons medium long and moder- 
ately broad, 2 :i 4 x 2 inches; oval; apex moderately rounded; medium 
green color. Leaves very shallowly lobed, moderately small, 
9x14 inches; margin denticulate, moderately frilled; surface moder- 
ately smooth; color medium green; petiole medium long and medium 
slender, 14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium size, 5-5 ] 2 
inches across, yellow; ovary drum-like; sepals medium long and 
moderately slender, 1-1 '4 inches; — staminate, moderately small, 
4-4 ' _. inches across; stigma twisted and irregular, distinctly 
expanded, sepals moderately short and moderately slender, 1 inch; 
pedicle short, 5-7 inches. 

Fruit small, 7-8 x 10-12 inches; weight 10-12 pounds. Shape 
drum-like, flattened at the base, distinctly depressed at the apex, 
often slightly constricted at the medial; ribbed narrowly; furrows 
shallow; surface moderately smooth and occasionally somewhat 
uneven; acorn very prominent, 2-3 inches in diameter, pale yellow 
margarite yellow) in color. Skin color bluish gray tea green to 
deep olive gray). Fruit stalk medium long, 3-4 inches, round, 
curved, spongy and corky. Shell very hard, woody, moderately 
thick, '--;',, inch. Flesh thickest at the base, 1 1 _i 1 ;1 1 inches; at 
the medial, 1 inch; at apex ' _. inch; texture moderately fine, medium 
dry. fair flavor and sweetness; quality fair; color dull yellow to light 



orange light cadmium to light orange yellow). Seed cavity medium 
size, near center and towards apex; placental tissue moderately 
abundant, stringy, rather difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium length and width, moderately 
plump, 1.88 x 1.07 x .36 cm. 1,108 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy 
white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Blue Hubbard. Refs. 33, 41, 73, 129, 130. Syn. 
Symmes Blue Hubbard. 

Of comparatively recent introduction, this variety 
has slowly forged ahead in the esteem of gardeners all 
over the country. It now has reached the position 
which was predicted for it when Mr. Gregory said in 
1909. the year of its introduction, " Our ninth intro- 
duction, all things considered, is our best. - ' It was 
named originally, Symmes Blue Hubbard, for S. S. 
Symmes, a gardener and florist of Cliftondale, Massa- 
chusetts, who for many years had grown seeds for the 
Gregory concern. It retains many of the Hubbard 
characteristics and probably was a hybrid between that 
variety and either Middleton Blue or Marblehead. 
Since its introduction there have been several changes 
in the accepted type but the description given below 
seems to be that represented by leading growers in 
Massachusetts. 

Mature fruits were obtained at Geneva in 120 days, 
5 days later than Hubbard, in season with Chicago 
Warted Hubbard and 5 days earlier than Essex Hybrid. 
The plants are more vigorous than those of Hubbard 
and have larger leaves which are distinctly more silvery 
green in color. The fruits are larger, longer, more 
heavily and deeply corrugated and have a distinctly 
thicker neck at the base. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet 
long; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons moderately 
long and broad, 3x2 inches; oval; apex tapered; veining moderately 
prominent; color grayish green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, 
medium large, 10 x 16 inches; margin slightly serrated near th; 
base, otherwise denticulate, frilled; surface moderately smooth; 
color moderately dark green, usually having a pale silvery sheen; 
petiole medium long and moderately heavy, 14—16 inches. Flower 
— pistillate, moderately large, 6 J 2 inches across, yellow, ovary fusi- 
form, slightly curved and moderately fuzzy; sepals short, slender, 
'■>- :! 4 inch; — staminate, medium large, 5-5 '3 inches across, sepals 
medium long and moderately slender, 1-1 .'4 inches; pedicle medium 
long, 8-9 inches. 

Fruit medium to moderately large, 15-18 x 9-12 inches; 
weight 12-18 pounds. Shape thick falcate-fusiform, moderately 
tapering towards the base into a thick neck. The long type carries 
the thickness over a greater length, the central portion being 
more oval than globular; ribbed irregularly; furrows narrow; 
surface wrinkled, warted, often corrugated. Blossom scar with 
button present, '4-' 2 inch long. Skin color blue gray (court 
gray; during late storage this is replaced by pale pink ipale pinkish 
buff). Fruit stalk moderately short, 2^-3 inches, round, slightly 
curved, rough and corky. Shell very hard, woody and thick, 
'4 inch, pale green (lime green) in color. Flesh moderately thick 
at the medial, 1 I 4 -1 1 2 inches, thick at the apex, 1 S 4 inches, and 
solid at the base, often 3—4 inches; texture fine, medium dry, moder- 
ately tender ; somewhat astringent, moderately sweet, good flavor; 
quality good; color dull orange (orange buff). Seed cavity large, 
contains a moderate amount of placental tissue, which is moderately 
dry, rather stringy, and easily removed. 

Seed medium long; medium large and broad, plump, 1.93 x 
1.24 x .46 cm. (88 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy white; margin 
rounded, smooth. 



18 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Boston Marrow. Refs. 1, 14, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 

28, 30, 31, 33, 34, 37, 38, 41, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 
50, 51, 52, 54, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65, 67, 72, 
73, 77, 78, 96, 98, 99, 101, 102, 105, 108, 115, 
116, 117, 119, 121, 125, 129, 130, 132, 135, 136. 
Syns. Autumnal Boston Marrow, Autumnal Mar- 
row, Boston Vegetable Marrow, Cambridge Mar- 
row, Chicago Marrow, Chicago Orange Mar- 
row, Colvin's Orange Marrow, Dunlap Early 
Prolific Marrow, Early Marrow, Early Orange 
Marrow, Early Prolific Marrow, Early Prolific 
Orange Marrow, Extra Early Marrow, Extra 
Early Orange Marrow, Extra Early Prolific 
Marrow, Extra Early Prolific Orange Mar- 
row, Golden West Hard Shell, Improved Boston 
Marrow, Improved Marrow, Improved Orange 
Marrow, Improved Prolific Marrow, Improved 
Prolific Orange Marrow, Large Boston Mar- 
row, Marrow, Metcalf, Orange, Orange Marrow, 
Prolific Marrow, Prolific Orange Marrow. 
For over a hundred years the Autumnal or Boston 
Marrow, or one of the many strains selected from it, 
has been grown as the standard early squash. As the 
first of the early varieties to be ready for market it 
has been one of the most widely grown of all sorts. 
Mr. J. M. Ives of Salem, Massachusetts, in a letter 
published by Fearing Burr, Jr., in his work on Field and 
Garden Vegetables, acknowledges the gift of a specimen 
in 1831 from a friend in Northampton, Massachusetts, 
who in turn had received the seeds from Buffalo, New 
York. A tribe of Indians who visited Buffalo in the 
spring of each year had, so the story goes, furnished 
seed to Buffalo gardeners. Here the trail ends. 

Of this variety, Gregory, writing in the New England 
Farmer, says: " If this squash originated among our 
Indians as this statement might lead us to infer, it is 
too much to suppose that with its splendid appearance 
and the many excellent qualities it possessed when first 
introduced it should have been unknown to the whites 
to so late a day." This also falls in with the view of 
T. W. Harris (65) who tried to find evidence that the 
Autumnal Marrow of Ives could be traced back to 
either Commodore Porter's Valparaiso squash and there- 
fore to Chilean origin or to the "C. mammeata" 
described as native of Chili by Molena in 1782. 

From 1831, the year this was first introduced, until 
1920, when Oscar H. Will of Bismarck, North Dakota, 
introduced several varieties as coming from an Indian 
origin, we have a period of nearly 100 years. Yet during 
this entire period if we are to rely on published records 
we have no other varieties of C. maxima mentioned as 
coming from a source traceable to the Indians. 

There have been many strains of this offered, such 
as Cambridge Marrow, Prolific Marrow, Dunlap Marrow, 
Chicago Orange Marrow. While it was thought that 
some of these were of hybrid origin most were probably 
selections or sports. The factor of color seems to have 
attracted attention. This has been true with all of the 
yellow squash, for apparently the ideal has been to 
select the darker specimens and to work toward a bright 



orange color skin. Descriptions of the variety as grown 
when first introduced picture it as a variety weighing 
from 5 to 6 pounds, smaller than the type now grown. 
Leading seedsmen of the past generation referred to 
this squash as the true pie squash, and apparently 
preferred it to the drier varieties. 

This variety is one of the earliest winter squashes, 
having reached maturity at Geneva in 100 days, 10 
days earlier than Golden Hubbard and in season with 
Quality. The vines of Boston Marrow and Golden 
Hubbard are very similar, although the pistillate flowers 
of the former are larger and have a turbinate ovary 
instead of fusiform one. The fruits of Boston Marrow 
are more flattened at the apex, not curved, and lack 
the grayish green blotch near the fleshy style common 
to Golden Hubbard. 

Plant trailing; vines coarse, moderately vigorous, 12-15 feet 
long; branches few, basal. Cotyledons moderately long and broad, 
3% x 2' 4 inches; long oval: apex tapered; veining moderately 
prominent; color moderately light green. Leaves shallowly lobed, 
small, 9x12 inches, margin slightly serrate near the base, otherwise 
denticulate; surface moderately smooth; color moderately dark 
green; petiole moderately short and moderately slender, 12-14 
inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately large, 6 inches across, pale 
yellow; ovary somewhat turbinated, abruptly tapered towards apex, 
slightly tapered towards base; sepals moderately short and moder- 
ately slender, 3 4 inch; — staminate, medium size, 5 1 ; inches across; 
sepals moderately short and moderately heavy at the base, 3 4 inch; 
pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 12-14 x 10-11 inches; weight 12-16 
pounds. Shape medial nearly globular, tapering very abruptly to 
the apex which is often nearly flattened, and gradually tapering 
towards the base; ribbed widely; furrows shallow; surface wrinkled 
and distinctly pock-marked. Blossom scar with button present, 
\^—yi inch long. Skin color orange (apricot orange to rufus; 
regularly laced with an orange buff (light ochraceous salmon) color 
pattern. Fruit stalk medium long, 3—4 inches, round, slightly 
curved, corky, soft. Shell moderately soft and medium thick ' . inch. 
Flesh thickest at the base, 2-2 ] 2 inches, medial and apical 1-1' -_> 
inches; texture moderately fine, moderately moist, tender; fair 
flavor and sweetness; quality fair; color orange yellow (deep chrome 
to orange buff). Seed cavity large, has much placental tissue which 
is moist, tender, and easily removed. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long and moderately 
narrow; medium plump, 2.15 x 1.24 x .34 cm. (108 per oz. . face 
wrinkled, glossy white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Brighton. Syn. New Brighton. 

In 1914 Richard Wellington self pollinated a number 
of plants of Hubbard squash at the Minnesota College 
of Agriculture at St. Paul. Some 23 inbred lines which 
could be separated according to size, shape, and color 
were isolated. These lines were carried along and con- 
tinued selfings made. In 1921 a small fruited type 
was introduced as Kitchenette. The demand for a 
larger fruited strain persisted and in 1932 the largest 
of these was named New Brighton and introduced from 
the Minnesota College of Agriculture and later by the 
C. J. Lindholm Seed Co. of Minneapolis. 

Brighton attained maturity at Geneva in 120 days, 
5 days earlier than Banana, in season with Blue Hubbard 
and Chicago Warted Hubbard and 5 days later than 
Hubbard. The vines are more vigorous than those of 
Hubbard, have leaves more glossy green, distinctly more 
crumpled and blistered, with auricles more ascending. 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



19 



and have considerably larger and more prominently 
veined flowers. The fruits are much larger, slightly 
rougher and have flesh which is much lighter yellow 
in color. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet. 
Cotyledons moderately short and moderately broad, 2 } i x 1 ■ , inches; 
short oval: apex moderately rounded; veining prominent; color 
distinctly grayish green. Leaves moderately small, 9x15 inches, 
very shallowly lobed; margin slightly serrated at the base, other- 
wise denticulate; surface moderately crumpled to somewhat blistered; 
turicles distinctly ascending, vertically parallel to each other, giv- 
ing the leaves a definite cone-like appearance; color moderately 
dark glossy green, occasionally very slightly marked with a silvery 
sheen; petiole short and heavy, 9-12 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
large. 7 inches across, pale orange; ovary fusiform, slightly fuzzy; 
sepals moderately short and medium slender, 3 4-l inch; — staminate, 
medium large. 5 \ _• inches across, veins of the corolla decidedly dark 
green and prominent; sepals medium long and medium heavy, 
1-1 l ■ inches, very dark green; pedicle very short, 4-5 inches. 

Fruit large, 16-20 x 12-14 inches; weight 28-32 pounds. 
Shape irregularly fusiform, often moderately constricted at the 
neck; ribbed moderately narrow and irregular; furrows moderately 
shallow; surface rather bumpy and uneven. Blossom scar with 
button prominent, 3 4 -l inch. Skin color dull bronzy green (dark 
grayish olive marked with narrow pale grayish green (pea green) 
streaks which radiate from the apex -j-'s length of fruit. Fruit 
stalk medium long, 3-4 inches, very thick, straight, rough and 
corky. Shell hard and very thick, 1 4 - :; .. inch, often } _• inch in some 
places. Flesh thick at the medial 1 } £-2 inches, very thick at the 
apex, 2 inches, and solid at the base, often 4 I L >-5 inches; texture 
moderately fine, moderately firm, slightly moist, somewhat stringy, 
fair flavor, slightly sweet; quality fair; color bright yellow iprimuline 
yellow . Seed cavity large, placental tissue moderately abundant, 
slightly moist, stringy and easily removed. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, narrow and plump, 
2.25 x 1.17 x .43 cm. 88 per oz. ); face wrinkled, glossy white; 
margin rounded and smooth. 

Butman. Refs. 9, 14, 26, 50, 59, 61, 64, 98, 109, 110, 
119, 128, 130, 132, 134. 

The Butman, introduced in 1875 by James J. H. 
Gregory, Marblehead, Massachusetts, was named for 
its originator, Clarendon Butman of Maine. It was 
said to have resulted from a cross between Hubbard 
and Yokahoma but in view of the fact that crosses 
between the species C. maxima and C. moschata are 
difficult to attain this crossing may not have occurred. 

This variety closely resembled Hubbard, being 
somewhat later in season and smaller fruited but more 
prolific. The fruits were less curved at the ends, brighter 
green, had more white markings, had lighter but more 
uniform flesh color and apparently was equal to the 
Hubbard in quality. 

Plant trailing; vines vigorous, very dark green at the nodes; 
branches many. Leaves large, very shallowly lobed; petioles 
streaked with pale green. 

Fruit small; 10-12 x 6-8 inches; weight 8-10 pounds. Shape 
fusiform; ribbed obscurely; furrows shallow; surface somewhat 
uneven, very slightly bumpy. Skin color bright grass green, 
blotched and streaked with pale creamy white. Shell hard and 
moderately thick. Flesh moderately thick; fine texture, dry, swee'., 
light salmon in color, lemon yellow when cooked; quality good. 

Buttercup. Refs. 138, 139. 

This, a newcomer to the list of squash, was developed 
to take the place of the sweet potato in the gardens 
of North Dakota and the Northern Plains region. 
In the trial garden at North Dakota Agricultural 



Experiment Station during the 1925 season a plant 
appeared in a row of Quality which produced fruits 
of desirable appearance. The fruits were included 
in the baking test given for all varieties and proved 
to be extraordinarily high in quality. This plant came 
from seed selected from a Quality plant which had been 
in a mixed variety planting the previous year. Seed 
saved from the 1925 selection indicated that a chance 
cross between Quality and Essex Hybrid had taken place. 

Fruits were selfed on the most promising plants 
and these subjected to a baking test for quality. In 
1931, after three years' selection, the most promising 
strain was released and named Buttercup. The quality 
testing work was carried out by Miss E. Latzke of the 
Department of Home Economics of the North Dakota 
College of Agriculture and the selfing and plant selec- 
tion work was done under the direction of Professor 
A. F. Yeager. Oscar H. Will & Co. of Bismarck, North 
Dakota, introduced Buttercup in their 1931 catalog. 

At Geneva mature fruits were produced in 105 
days, 10 days earlier than Bay State, in season with 
Golden Delicious and 5 days later than Quality. The 
vines are much less vigorous than those of Quality and 
Bay State and bear pistillate flowers which are smaller 
and less ruffled than those of Quality with an oblate 
ovary instead of a turbinate one. The fruits are smaller 
than those of Quality, similar in skin color, but possess 
a much more prominent blossom end scar, similar to 
that of Bay State. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, moderately vigorous, 10-12 feet; 
branches few, basal. Cotyledons medium long and moderately broad, 
2 3 4 x 1 3 4 inches, long oval; apex moderately tapered; color medium 
green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, small, 8 x 12 inches; margin 
denticulate, slightly frilled; surface occasionally somewhat blistered; 
color moderately dark green; petiole short and moderately slender, 
10-12 inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately small, 4-4 l ■> inches 
across, yellow; ovary drum-like; sepals short and moderately 
slender, 5 s- 3 4 inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4 inches across; 
stigma decidedly expanded; sepals medium long and moderately 
heavy, 1-1 } 4 inches; pedicle very short, 4-5 inches. 

Fruit very small, 4-5 x 6-8 inches; weight 3-5 pounds. Shape 
somewhat drum-like, sides slightly tapering before leveling off at 
the apex; base full, slightly rounded; ribbed broadly, furrows shallow; 
surface moderately smooth, indistinctly pock-marked. Acorn very 
prominent, usually somewhat protuberant, 2-3 inches in diameter 
and gray 'light mineral gray) in color. Skin color dull dark 
green idark ivy green to dull blackish green I spotted with grayish 
(storm gray to light mineral gray) pock-marks. Fruit stalk 
moderately short, 2J^— 3 inches, round, curved, rough and 
corky. Shell moderately hard and thin, , ! s inch. Flesh moderately 
thick, 1-1 ' 2 inches at the base and medial, considerably thinner 
at the apex; texture very fine, tender, dry; sweet and excellent 
flavor; quality excellent; color orange (cadmium yellow to deep 
chrome). Seed cavity small, towards apex, containing much 
placental tissue which is often chunky and rather difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long, narrow and moderately 
plump, 1.90 x .86 x .38 cm. (140 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy 
white; margin rounded, smooth 

Chicago Warted Hubbard. Refs. 33, 38, 41, 45, 47, 

61, 64, 73, 101, 129, 130. Syns. Green Warted 
Hubbard, Hard Shell Warty Hubbard, Large 
Warted Hubbard, Mammoth Warted Hubbard, 
New Mammoth Hubbard, Toledo Warted Hub- 
bard, Warted Hubbard. 



20 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



The Waited Hubbard was developed by the Budlong 
Gardens of Chicago from the original Hubbard and 
after several years trial was introduced in 1894 by 
Vaughan's Seed Store of Chicago. 

Maturity was attained in 120 days at Geneva, 5 
days earlier than Banana and Victor, in season with 
Blue Hubbard and 5 days later than the regular 
Hubbard. The vines are more vigorous than those of 
Hubbard and have pistillate flowers which are consider- 
ably larger. The fruits are thicker, decidedly more 
heavily warted and have flesh which is darker and 
more uniform in color. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet: 
branches moderately many, basal and occasionally medial. Cotyle- 
dons moderately long and broad, 3x2 inches, oval; apex moderately 
rounded; color medium green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, 
medium large, 10 x 16 inches; margin denticulate, moderately 
frilled; surface moderately smooth, occasionally somewhat crumpled; 
color medium green; petiole long and medium heavy, 18-20 inches; 
flower — pistillate, large, 7 inches across, lemon yellow; ovary some- 
what fusiform, slightly tapering at both ends, enlarged at the medial; 
sepals moderately short and very slender, • g inch. — staminate, 
medium large, 5 ' j inches across; sepals medium long and moderately 
slender, 1-1 '4 inches; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit medium large, 12-14 x 10-12 inches; weight 12-15 
pounds. Shape thick falcate-fusiform; ribbed irregularly; 
furrows deep; surface heavily and deeply wrinkled and warted; 
blossom scar with button ^4— 1 inch. Skin color deep dull green 
dusky olive green) marked with narrow, pale green (pea green) 
stripes which radiate from the apex, J 4 to J^j the length of the fruit, 
often obscure. Fruit stalk short, 2 ] 2~3 inches, round, slightly 
curved, rough and corky. Shell very hard, woody and thick to 
very thick, ' [— % inch. Flesh medium thick at the medial, 1-1 '4 
inches, thick at the apex, 2-2 ' o inches, and very thick at the base, 
usually solid flesh, 3 inches or more; texture very fine, dry, tender, 
crisp, occasionally somewhat lumpy; moderately sweet and well 
flavored; quality very good; color deep yellow I deep chrome 1. Seed 
cavity moderately large, contains much placental tissue, rather 
stringy, moderately easy to remove. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long and narrow, moder- 
ately plump, 2.12 x 1.12 x .42 cm. (104 per oz.); face wrinkled, 
glossy white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Cocoa-Nut. Refs. 24, 56. Syn. Cocoa. 

This is a variety which was often confused with 
Valparaiso because of the number of varied colored 
strains grown under that name. A specimen of Cocoa 
was shown at a Massachusetts Horticultural Society 
exhibit in 1856 by E. M. Richards of Dedham, Massa- 
chusetts, and was listed by Breck in 1838 and by Thor- 
burn in 1847. It was undoubtedly one of the early 
squash which was brought in with ships or as treasured 
trophies cr importations. 

In shape and general character of the color pattern 
this variety seems to resemble Virginia Mammoth, a 
moschata variety. The color of its seeds, however, 
classifies it as a maxima sort of which there is nothing 
quite like it in type. It apparently was exceedingly 
variable in quality and therefore probably variable in 
other respects. 

Fruit large, 16-20 x 8-10 inches; weight 15-20 pounds. Shape 
oblong to oval, slightly enlarged near the apex: ribbed obscurely, 
furrows very shallow. Skin color ash gray spotted and marked 
with light drab along the furrows. Fruit stalk small. Shell thin, 
soft. Flesh medium thick, variable in texture, dryness and sweet- 



ness, deep orange yellow. Seeds pure white, broader in proportion 
to their length than those of Hubbard or Boston Marrow. 

Crown. Refs. 39, 40. Syns. Improved Crown, Select 
Crown. 

This variety from Australia shows relationship to 
the turban shaped varieties which were commonly 
grown in this country 30 years ago. It is popular in 
Australia and is used both for pies and as a cooked 
vegetable. 

It is one cf the latest winter squashes, having 
required 140 days to attain maturity at Geneva. This 
was more than three weeks later than Hubbard, 10 days 
later than Etampes and 5 days later than Triangle. 
The vines are decidedly more vigorous than those of 
Hubbard and have much longer petioles and flower 
pedicles. The fruits are much smaller than Hubbard, 
somewhat shaped like Bay State but have more rounded 
shoulders, smaller seed cavity and darker colored flesh. 

Plant trailing; vines coarse, very vigorous. 20-25 feet; branches 
many, basal, medial and apical. Cotyledons medium long and 
broad, 2 ' 2 x 2 inches; nearly round; apex rounded; veining moder- 
ately prominent; color medium green. Leaves very shallowly 
lobed, moderately large, 11x17 inches; margin slightly serrated at 
the base, otherwise denticulate, moderately frilled; surface moder- 
ately smooth; color dark green; petiole very long and moderately 
slender, 18-22 inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately large, 6 
inches across, pale orange, veins prominent, moderately dark 
green, petals slightly curved; ovary drum-like; sepals moderately 
short and medium slender, 3 4-'s inch; — staminate, moderately 
small, 4 ! j inches across, petals distinctly curved, veins slightly 
lighter green; sepals medium long and medium heavy, 1 inch; 
pedicle long, 10-12 inches. 

Fruit small, 6—7 x 9-10 inches; weight 10-12 pounds. Shape 
drum -like, sides and shoulders moderately curved; apex slightly 
depressed, base flattened; ribbed moderately wide; furrows shallow; 
surface smooth. Blossom scar with button J 4— ' _> inch, in center of 
acorn 2-5 inches in diameter, usually depressed, occasionally pro- 
tuberant, giving the fruit a crown-like appearance. Skin color 
gray storm gray) occasionally mottled with light gray court 
gray). Fruit stalk moderately long, 4-5 inches, curved, rough and 
corky. Shell hard and moderately thick, K-'i inch. Flesh 
moderately thick at the base and medial, 1 '4-1 J i inches, moderately 
thin at the apex, 3 ( -l inch; texture moderately fine, very firm and 
hard, slightly stringy, moderately dry; moderately sweet, fair 
flavor; quality fair to moderately good; color deep yellow capucine 
yellow . Seed cavity moderately small, in center and nearest the 
apex; placental tissue abundant, moist, very stringy, difficult to 
remove. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, medium broad and 
plump, 2.1 x 1.3 x .48 cm. 1 88 per oz. 1 : face smooth or slightly pitted, 
moderately glossy brown 1 snuff brown 1 1; margin prominent, slightly 
swollen, rounded, smooth, pale buff cream buff/ in color. 

Delicious. Refs. 30, 31, 32, 33, 41, 60, 61, 73, 81, 97, 
112, 122, 129. Syn. New Delicious Winter. 
It has been said " A squash without fine quality is 
no better than a pumpkin and is not worth raising." 
Delicious introduced by James J. H. Gregory & Sons 
of Marblehead, Massachusetts, as a novelty in 1903, is 
regarded by many as the finest of all squashes in quality. 
No statement of origin other than that given in the 
Gregory catalog of 1904 has been found. This attributes 
its origin to Faxon crossed with other sorts, among 
them the large Brazilian blue varieties. From its 
appearance no clue other than a shape somewhat like 




GOLDEN HUBBARD 



(Two-thirds natural size) 




/ 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



21 



Faxon is offered, although Gregory says, " About every 
variety we ever knew enters into its composition." 
Delicious has become the leading fall variety, it keeps 
well and is suited to roadside and family trade. 

Delicious matured at Geneva in 110 days, 5 days 
earlier than Hubbard, in season with Kitchenette and 
10 days later than Quality. The vines are similar to 
and equally as vigorous as those of Hubbard, with 
ovaries of the pistillate flowers turbinate instead of 
curved spindle-shape. The fruits are slightly larger 
than those of Quality, longer and more gradually tapered 
towards the apex. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet; branches medium in number, basal. Cotyledons medium 
long and moderately broad, 2 :i i x 1",, inches; broad oval; apex 
tapered; color medium green, occasionally with a grayish tinge. 
Leaves shallowly lobed; moderately small, 10 x 14 inches; margin 
denticulate, slightly frilled; surface smooth; color dark green. 
Flower — pistillate, medium large, 5-5 ' _> inches across, yellow; 
ovary turbinate; sepals moderately short and moderately slender, 
J-4 inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4-4 '_> inches across; sepals 
medium long and very slender, 1 inch; pedicle medium long, 8-9 
inches. 

Fruit small, 8-9 x 7-8 inches; weight 6-9 pounds. Shape 
turbinate, slightly depressed at the base, ribbed widely; furrows 
rather shallow; surface rather rough, moderately pock-marked. 
Blossom scar with button ^ inch long. Skin color dull green 
dark ivy green) spotted with gray (court gray to light mineral 
gray to conform with the pock-marks, and marked with narrow 
gray court gray i streaks radiating from the apex towards the medial, 
often inconspicuous. Fruit stalk moderately short, 2-3 inches, 
round, slightly curved, rough and corky. Shell moderately hard 
and medium thick. J y inch. Flesh moderately thick at the medial 
and apex, 1 '4-1 ' 2 inches, often very thick at the base, 2-2 ' _> inches; 
texture very fine, firm, crisp, dry: sweet and very good flavor; 
quality excellent; color orange i cadmium orange to orange buffi. 
Seed cavity moderately small, medium amount of placental tissue 
which is moderately moist, moderately stringy and easily removed. 

Seed medium size; medium long and moderately narrow, 
moderately plump, 1.85 x .90 x .36 cm. 144 per oz.); face surface 
wrinkled, glossy white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Essex II>bri<l. Refs. 14, 26, 30, 31, 33, 37, 38, 41, 46, 

47, 50, 52, 59, 61, 73, 89, 96, 98, 101, 108, 115, 
128, 129, 130, 134, 135, 137. Syns. Essex, Essex 
Hardshell Turban, Low's Premium Hybrid, 
Improved American Turban. 

The Hon. Aaron Low, seedsman, of Essex, Massa- 
chusetts, in passing over a field of American Turban 
squashes noticed a vine with a number of decidedly 
different squash. The three squash on this vine seemed 
to show characteristics of both the Turban and Hubbard 
varieties. This was in 1879, and four years later after 
selecting for hard shell and a more orange color this 
new squash was introduced in 1883 by Burpee, Ferry, 
Gregory, Sibley and Vick. Others were quick to see 
its possibilities and since then the variety has been one 
of the most treasured sorts to grow for market and 
winter storage. 

At Geneva 125 days were required for this variety 
to reach maturity, 5 days earlier than Etampes, in 
season with Victor and 10 days later than Hubbard. 
The vines are considerably less vigorous than those of 
Victor, have smaller leaves and flowers with the stigmas 



decidedly more expanded than those of Victor and the 
ovaries more oblate. The fruits are much less warted 
than those of Victor and shaped much the same as Bay 
State. The skin color is a much deeper orange than 
American Turban and somewhat less deep orange than 
Warren. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, moderately vigorous, 
10-12 feet long; branches many, basal. Cotyledons moderately 
long and broad, 3 x 2 l ( inches; oval; apex moderately rounded; 
color medium green; leaves very shallowly lobed, moderately small, 
9 x 14 inches; margin denticulate, frilled; surface moderately smooth 
to somewhat crumpled; color medium green; petiole moderately 
short and slender, 12 14 inches. Flower —pistillate, medium size, 
S-S'o inches across, yellow; ovary drum-like, pale yellowish cream 
mottled with pale green; sepals moderately short and slender, 
'_• :! i inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4-4'^ inches across; 
stigma distinctly expanded and curved; sepals medium long and 
very heavy, 1 inch; pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 8-9 x 11-12 inches, weight 10-12 
pounds. Shape drum-like, slightly depressed at the base; surface 
much wrinkled and warted over the entire area, moderate in depth. 
Skin color deep orange red (coral red to flame scarlet), indistinctly 
marked with I apricot orange) stripes which radiate from the apex, 
two-thirds the length of fruit, ' . j — ' 2 inch in breadth. Acorn very 
prominent, 3 to 5 inches in diameter, usually slightly protuberant 
and ranging in color from pinkish buff (light ochraceous salmon) to 
grayish green (pea green) or a combination of both. Fruit stalk 
medium long, 3-4 inches, round, moderately curved, corky. Shell 
hard, woody, J4 inch thick. Flesh thickest at the base and medial, 
1 J4— 1 ' 2 inches; apex very thin, ' _> inch, texture medium fine, slightly 
stringy, tender, moderately moist: moderate flavor and sweetness; 
quality fair; color orange (deep chrome to mikado orange'. Seed 
cavity large, in center and towards apex; placental core and tissus 
very prominent, moist, tender, often rather difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large: medium length and width, plump, 1.82 
x 1.04 x .43 cm. (112 per oz.); face wrinkled, moderately glossy 
white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Etampes. Refs. 14, 33, 41, 49, 50, 59, 73, 101, 108, 
129, 130, 137. Syns. Bright Red Etampes, 
Etampes Bright Red Mammoth, Etampes Mam- 
moth Red, Large Bright Red Etampes, Large 
Red Etampes, Mammoth Bright Red Etampes, 
Mammoth Etampes, Mammoth Red Etampes 
Marrow, New Marrow Pumpkin, Red Etampes. 
This is a French variety which was brought to this 
country and offered for sale in 1883 by W. Atlee Burpee 
8s Co. of Philadelphia. The fruits are attractive because 
of the glossy bright orange-red skin color. At one 
time it was little used but during the last ten years its 
importance has increased and in some sections it is the 
most important pumpkin grown. For nearly a hundred 
years it has been one of the most important varieties 
grown in France. A strain sold as Morse's Marrow 
has at Geneva produced earlier and slightly smaller 
fruits. 

One hundred and thirty days were required to 
mature this variety, 10 days later than Mammoth, 
5 days later than Essex Hybrid and 5 days earlier than 
Triangle. The vines are somewhat more vigorous 
than those of Mammoth, have lighter green foliage 
and considerably larger flowers which are decidedly 
more soft and velvet-like, and more frilled and curbed 
at the margins. The fruits are similar in shape to the 
Cheese pumpkin, but are larger in all respects; also 



22 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



considerably smaller and much more oblate and more 
uniform in shape than Mammoth. 

Plant trailing: vines medium coarse, very vigorous, 18-20 feet; 
branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons moderately long 
and very broad, 3% x 2 ;! s inches; oval; apex moderately rounded; 
veining moderately prominent; color moderately light green. 
Leaves very shallowly lobed, almost entire; medium large, 10 x 16 
inches; margin slightly serrate at the base, otherwise denticulate, 
moderately frilled; surface moderately smooth, occasionally some- 
what crumpled; auricles distinctly ascending, often nearly vertically 
parallel to each other; color moderately light green; petiole medium 
long and heavy, 14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, large, 7 1 2 inches 
across; pale orange, very soft and velvet-like, margin frilled and 
curved: ovary nearly globular, flattened at base and apex, yellowish 
cream in color: sepals very short and moderately slender, ' 4 -'■'■ g inch, 
much darker green than on staminate flowers; — staminate, medium 
large, 5 inches across, very soft and velvet-like, margins curved 
and frilled; sepals moderately short and moderately slender, 3 4 inch, 
pedicle short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit medium large, 9-10 x 16-18 inches: weight 30-35 
pounds. Shape oblate, depressed at base and apex; ribbed widely; 
furrows very shallow; surface smooth, occasionally somewhat 
uneven. Blossom scar with button \£r J^ inch long, usually sur- 
rounded with a narrow, cork-like ring. Skin color orange red 
(carrot red to orange chrome 1. Fruit stalk medium long, 3-4 
inches, round, slightly curved, rough, corky. Shell moderately 
soft and thin, &— J^ inch. Flesh very thick at the medial, 2 J 1 , 
inches, thick at the base and apex, \ l -y- 1 3 ^ inches; texture coarse, 
fibrous, moderately moist, medium tender; quality fair to poor, 
insipid; color deep yellow cadmium yellow to deep chrome). Seed 
cavity moderately large contains much placenta! tissue which is 
moist, tough and difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, narrow and medium 
plump, 2.2 x 1.15 x .35 cm. 96 per oz.j; face slightly wrinkled, 
glossy white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Faxon. Refs. 17, 26, 28, 30, 33, 47, 64, 73, 111, 116, 
130. Syns. Faxon's Brazilian, Faxon's New 
Brazilian, New Brazilian. 

The Faxon squash came originally from southern 
Brazil and was named by M. B. Faxon of Saugus, 
Massachusetts. Seed had been sent by E. S. Rand to 
B. K. Bliss of New York. Vaughan's Seed Store, 
Chicago, listed it in 1894, and it was soon carried by 
all leading houses. 

When first introduced the type was not fixed as 
to the color, the fruits ripening in two colors, sage green 
and orange. In other characters it proved to be a 
superior variety of good constitution, early and a good 
keeper. For many years it was considered a valuable 
addition to squash lists, but inasmuch as it never became 
pure as to color and because newer sorts were superior, 
it gradually was replaced in trade lists. 

Mature fruits of the Faxon were produced at Geneva 
in about 105 days, which was 5 days earlier than Golden 
Hubbard, in season with Golden Delicious, and 5 days 
later than Boston Marrow. Modern stocks are mixed 
with a small green Hubbard-like fruit. For the purpose 
of this account the description to follow relates to the 
type as introduced. This variety most resembles in 
shape the short turbinate type of Golden Delicious, 
being more rotund and somewhat rougher in skin texture. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, medium vigor, 8-10 
feet long; branches moderately few, medial. Flower — pistillate, 
large, 7 inches across, bright lemon yellow; ovary somewhat turbi- 



nate, sepals medium long and slender, 1 inch; — staminate, 6 inches 
across; sepals medium long and thick, 1-1 }| inches; both sexes 
delicately frilled about the margin. 

Fruit small, 9-10 x 9-10 inches; weight 6-7 pounds. Shape 
somewhat turbinate, slightly depressed about the stem, rounded 
at the medial and abruptly tapering at the apex: ribbed widely; 
furrows shallow, surface slightly wrinkled and obscurely pock- 
marked. Skin color pale salmon (ochraceous salmon) narrowly 
striped for three-fourths the length of fruit radiating from the 
apex with pale pink (pale flesh color), often sparsely and irregularly 
blotched with the same color. Fruit stalk moderately short, 2-3 
inches, round, straight, rough, soft and spongy. Shell moderately 
hard and rather thin, T j inch. Flesh thickest at the base, 1-1 }4 
inches; texture very fine, fiberless, moderately good; color deep 
yellow (cadmium yellow). Seed cavity moderately large. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, narrow and moder- 
ately plump, 2.1 x 1.1 x .38 cm. (100 per oz.j; face wrinkled, glossy 
white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Froneh Turban. Refs. 1, 4, 7, 14, 19, 24, 26, 27, 31, 

41, 42, 43, 44, 50, 54, 65, 101, 103, 116, 130, 133, 
137. Syns. Acorn, California, Giraumon Turban, 
Turban, Turban Pumpkin, Turks Cap. 
This may represent the original of this oddly shaped 
squash. The name Acorn was used because of its 
resemblance in the younger stage to an acorn, while 
at the more mature stage it looked much like an immense 
Turkish turban. There were possibly several turban- 
shaped squash known which more or less accentuated this 
characteristic, but from early writing and descriptions all 
were rather poor in quality. The name Turban occurred 
in the Almanach du Bon Jardinier in 1818 while the name 
Acorn occurred as early as 1827 in the catalog of J. B. 
Russell. Many photographs have been published 
which show diverse types, some of which might even be 
called plant monstrosities. A large number of forms are 
shown in a recent Russian publication (22). The various 
specimens shown were collected largely from South 
America or Asiatic sources and show rather widespread 
use of this group. Selections made within the group after 
1850 tended to eliminate extreme turban shapes and to 
evolve types which merely show a well-marked but non- 
protruding crown. 

At Geneva 115 days were required for this variety 
to reach maturity, 10 days earlier than Essex Hybrid, 
in season with Hubbard and 15 days later than Boston 
Marrow. The plants are much less vigorous than those 
of Essex Hybrid. The fruits are smaller and have a 
distinctly larger, more protuberant turban with a pro- 
portionately smaller per cent of edible portion. 

Plant trailing; vines rather slender, weak, 8-10 feet, very dark 
green; branches moderately few, basal. Leaves small, 9 x 13 inches, 
shallowly lobed; margin moderately frilled, denticulate; surface 
occasionally blistered. Pistillate flowers moderately large, 6 inches 
across, light orange; ovary drum-like, distinctly expanded at the 
apex; stigma very irregular and expanded. 

Fruit small, 7-8 x 10-12 inches; weight 8-10 pounds. Shape 
drum-like, with acorn very prominent and protuberant, fully one- 
third to one-half of the fruit; surface moderately smooth. Skin 
color basal portion is deep orange (apricot orange to peach red) 
often in the form of an irregular lace-like color pattern, within the 
mesh of which is a dull red icarrot red 1 ground color. The acorn 
is usually pink (pinkish buff) very sparsely streaked or blotched 
with orange (apricot orange) and often having considerable gray 
(light mineral gray) on it. Shell medium thick and moderately 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



23 



soft. Flesh moderately thick at base, l'l-l 1 .' inches, but thin at 
apex; texture fine, rather juicy, tender; light orange lorange buff): 
quality poor. 

Seeds wrinkled, glossy white, medium size. 

Gilmore. Refs. 33, 41. 129. 

Originating as the result of a cross between Winne- 
bago and Arikara this was introduced in 1926 and named 
for Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore, Museum of Anthropology, 
University of Michigan, who had previously introduced 
several squash varieties which had been and are still 
cultivated by the Plains Indians. Oscar H. Will & 
Co., Bismarck, North Dakota, selected from the cross 
a type in shape somewhat like Winnebago but in earliness 
and color like the Arikara. 

Gilmore required 115 days to reach maturity at 
Geneva. This was 5 days earlier than Winnebago, 10 
days earlier than Banana and in season with Hubbard. 
The vines are less vigorous than those of Winnebago 
and Banana but otherwise are very similar to them. 
The fruits are similar in shape to Banana, but are more 
wrinkled and warted as well as being salmon orange 
in color. 

Plant trailing: vines medium coarse, medium vigor, 8-10 feet; 
branches few, basal. Cotyledons moderately long and very broad, 
3 x 2'j inches; short oval to nearly round; apex tapered. Color 
moderately light green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, moderately 
small, 9 x 14 inches; margin slightly serrated at the base, otherwise 
denticulate, slightly frilled; surface smooth; color medium green; 
petiole short and moderately slender, 1— lj^ inches. Flower — 
pistillate, medium large, 5 inches across, yellow; ovary long and 
cylindrical, slightly tapering at base and apex; sepals very short 
and slender, ? * inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4 inches across; 
sepals moderately short and moderately slender, ?4 inch, rather 
heavily pubescent; pedicle very short, 4-5 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 15-18 x 5-6 inches; weight 6-8 pounds. 
Shape cylindrical, moderately tapering towards base and apex; 
surface wrinkled and shallowly warted. Blossom scar with button 
\i~}--2 inch long. Skin color orange (salmon orange to ochraceous 
salmon i marked with streaks of variable width radiating from the 
apex one-half to two-thirds length of fruit, buff pink (pale ochraceous 
buffi in color; often marked with small longitudinal blotches at the 
base and medial with the same color; extreme apical area blotched 
with dark green dull blackish green I and streaked with pale green 
sage green I to conform with the streaks of the major color pattern. 
Fruit stalk short, 1-2 inches, round, slightly curved, rough and 
corky. Shell moderately hard and medium thick, J ., inch. Flesh 
moderately thin, ? j-l inch, somewhat thicker at the base, 1 1 2 _ 1 3 4 
inches; texture fine, firm, crisp; moderately sweet, moderately good 
flavor; quality good; color deep yellow Icapucine yellow to light 
cadmium . Seed cavity large, conforms to fruit shape, has much 
placental tissue which is moist, stringy and difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, moderately narrow 
and plump, 2.1 x 1.2 x .50 cm. i 76 per oz.): face smooth, brown 
(snuff brown); margin ridged, corky, dull white (cartridge buff). 

Golden Bronze. Refs. 31, 61, 121, 130. 

Golden Bronze was said to have been a selection 
from a cross between Bay State and Boston Marrow, 
and was introduced in 1899 by James J. H. Gregory 
& Sons of Marblehead, Massachusetts. From pictures 
and descriptions it was very much like the Boston 
Marrow parent except in the dark grayish green color 
showing bronzing on the upper side. It possessed similar 
pock-mark skin irregularities of Boston Marrow, was 
nearly as early in maturing and slightly smaller in size. 



Fruit moderately small, 10-12 x 8-10 inches; weight 8-10 
pounds. Shape medial nearly globular, tapering abruptly to the 
apex and gradually tapering towards the base; surface wrinkled 
and distinctly pock-marked. Skin color dark grayish green turning 
to bronze green during storage. Shell hard and moderately thick. 
Flesh medium thick, texture fine, sweet, good flavor, bright golden 
yellow in color; quality good. 

Golden Delicious. Refs. 33, 41, 129. 

Two of the most widely grown squash varieties 
were used as the parents of this modern sort. Boston 
Marrow was chosen because of its color and earliness 
while Delicious was used for its size and quality. From 
the many forms coming from the cross the type later 
named and introduced as Golden Delicious was selected. 
The original cross was made some four years before the 
date of introduction in 1926 by Gill Bros. Seed Co. of 
Portland, Oregon. For canners this has proved to have 
unusual qualifications, for in addition to the orange 
skin color it has thick flesh high in starch content which 
will pack a product of desirable consistency. For this 
reason it is often used to blend with other varieties. 

Golden Delicious attained maturity at Geneva in 
105 days, 5 days earlier than Delicious and Golden 
Hubbard and 5 days later than Boston Marrow. Vines 
of these three varieties are similar, although the leaves 
of Golden Delicious are larger and the ovaries of the 
pistillate flowers distinctly turbinate. The fruits are 
similar in size and shape to Delicious, differing chiefly 
in color of skin. 

Plant trailing; vines medium heavy, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet; branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons medium 
long and very broad 2 3 4 x 2}i inches; short oval to nearly round; 
apex rounded, color medium green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, 
nearly entire, medium large, 10 x 16 inches; margin denticulate 
and slightly frilled; surface moderately smooth; color moderately 
dark green; petiole medium long and heavy, 14-16 inches. Flower 

— pistillate, medium large, 5 '3-6 inches across, pale yellow; ovary 
turbinate; sepals moderately short and moderately slender, 3 4 inch; 

— staminate, moderately small, 4 1 £—5 inches across; sepals medium 
long and moderately slender, 1-1 J4 inches; pedicle short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit small, 8-10 x 8-9 inches; weight 6 to 9 pounds. Shape 
turbinate; ribbed widely; furrows very shallow; surface finely 
wrinkled, occasionally somewhat pock-marked. Blossom scar with 
button ' ;- 3 .[ inch long. Skin color orange to orange red lapricot 
orange to rufous) marked with narrow, pinkish buff (light ochraceous 
salmon 1 stripes which radiate from the apex one-third to one-half 
length of fruit, and often with a very small, dark green (slate green) 
area at the extreme apex. Fruit stalk moderately short, 2-3 inches, 
curved, rough and corky. Shell moderately hard and thin to 
medium thick, r,,- 1 g inch. Flesh thick at the base, 1 J j-1 '4 inches, 
moderately thick at medial and apex, 1 1 4-1 1 _> inches; texture fine, 
crisp, moderately dry; moderately sweet and fair flavor; quality 
good; color orange 1 cadmium yellow to capucine yellow). Seed 
cavity medium large, contains moderately much placental tissue 
which is moderately dry and tender, moderately easy to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium length and width, moderately 
plump, 1.85 x 1.04 x .38 cm. (128 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy 
white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Golden Hubbard. Refs. 30, 33, 38, 41, 60, 61, 73, 
81, 101, 121, 129, 130. Syns. Genesee Golden, 
Genesee Red Hubbard, Golden Warted Hubbard, 
Hard Shelled Marrow, New Red Hubbard, Red 
Hubbard. 
For many years after the Hubbard squash was 

introduced it made little headway with commercial 



24 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



gardeners. This was attributed to the pale, unassuming 
color of the Hubbard as contrasted with the yellow 
orange of Autumnal Marrow. D. M. Ferry in 1898 
introduced Golden Hubbard which they had grown in 
trial the two previous seasons. The origination of this 
most promising squash was attributed to J. J. Harrison 
of the Storrs 8b Harrison Co., Painesville, Ohio. 

This variety matured in 110 days at Geneva, 5 
days earlier than Hubbard, in season with Delicious 
and 10 days later than Boston Marrow. Vines much 
the same as those of Hubbard with the flowers slightly 
smaller. The fruits are slightly smaller than those of 
Hubbard with the flesh darker and more uniformly 
orange yellow in color and considerably drier than that 
of Boston Marrow. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet; branches many, basal. Cotyledons medium long and 
moderately broad, 2?js1;j inches; oval; apex moderately tapered; 
color medium green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, moderately small, 
9x IS inches; margin slightly serrated near the base, otherwise den- 
ticulate, moderately frilled; surface moderately smooth, occasionally 
coarsely crumpled; color moderately dark green; petiole short and 
moderately heavy, 10—12 inches; pedicle very short, 4—5 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 10-12 x 8-9 inches; weight 8-10 
pounds. Shape thick falcate-fusiform; base abruptly tapered to a 
moderately thick neck, slightly constructed. Ribbed widely; 
furrows shallow; surface wrinkled, uneven and moderately warted. 
Blossom scar with button 1 4~ 1 j inch. Skin color orange to orange 
red (carnelian red to rufous), marked with narrow, pinkish buff 
(light ochraceous salmon) stripes which radiate from the apex for 
one-third to one-half length of fruit, occasionally blotched with the 
same color; extreme apical area marked with an irregular, dark green 
slate olive) area. Fruit stalk moderately short 2 ' £-3 inches. Flesh 
thickest at the base and apex; texture moderately fine, crisp, firm, 
moderately dry; moderately sweet, good flavor; quality good; 
color orange yellow (cadmium orange to capucine yellow.) Seed 
cavity moderately large, contains medium amount of placental 
tissue which is moderately dry, tender and easily removed. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, narrow and plump, 
2.0 x 1.1 x .48 cm. (88 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy white; margin 
rounded and smooth. 

Gray Boulogne. Refs. 14, 50, 101, 130, 137. 

This variety, when first listed about 1884 by W. 
Atlee Burpee, was introduced as a new foreign pumpkin. 
Its name comes from the town Boulogne-sur-Seine, south 
of Paris, France. 

This French variety somewhat resembles Etampes 
in general shape although it is more obscurely furrowed. 
In skin color and character the two are, however, quite 
distinct. 

Plant trailing; vines very vigorous, 20-25 feet, dark green at 
the base, blending into pale green towards the medial and apex; 
leaves large, nearly entire, deep green, margin denticulate, petioles 
long and slender. 

Fruit small; 8x12 inches, reported to be as much as 30 inches 
in diameter under a more favorable environment. Shape distinctly 
oblate, depressed at base and apex; ribs obscure, furrows very 
shallow; surface dark green finely shaded and mottled with pale 
yellowish green, finely crossmarked and streaked with gray netting 
over much of the area. Flesh thick, moderately dry, rather granu- 
lar, yellow, fair quality. 

Hester. Refs. 97, 130. Syns. New Hester, Yellow 
Sibley. 
About 1889 Mr. William Hester secured some stock 
seed of Sibley from the originator of that variety. From 



this lot, a plant which produced pale yellow or cream- 
colored fruits was discovered. Continued selection led 
to the introduction of the variety as Yellow Sibley in 
1899 by the Iowa Seed Co. A year later the name 
was changed to Hester and was carried by this concern 
until about 1918. Apparently the fruits were similar 
in shape to Sibley, possibly being more elongated. The 
skin was pinkish yellow, slightly striped at the apex 
with light green. 

Honolulu. Refs. 24, 125, 131. Syn. Nectarine. 

The Massachusetts Horticultural Society in its 
report for 1860 notes that the Honolulu Nectarine 
squash was exhibited by Josiah Newhall. Grant Thor- 
burn, New York City, offered it in his catalog of 1861 
and likewise Hovey 8s Co., Boston, Massachusetts, in 
1863 as a new winter variety. 

In some respects the shape resembled that of Faxon, 
differing from that variety by being more globular and 
more deeply furrowed. Like Faxon considerable varia- 
tion existed in color of the skin, a factor which probably 
attributed to its instability as a standard variety. 

Plant trailing; vine coarse and moderately vigorous, 12-15 
feet. Leaves very large, petioles often 3 feet long. 

Fruit large; somewhat oblate to globular, depressed about the 
stem; ribbed broadly; furrowed moderately deep; skin color ash 
green, often striped and variegated with drab or lighter shades of 
green. Flesh thick, rather moist, slightly sweet, moderately dry, 
reddish orange. 

Hubbard. Refs. 1, 2, 11, 14, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 31, 33, 36, 37, 41, 43, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60. 61, 64, 67, 73, 80, 
89, 94, 96, 98, 100, 101, 115, 116, 120, 121, 122, 
125, 129, 130, 131, 132, 135, 137. Syns. Green 
Hubbard, Green Mountain, Improved Hubbard, 
Mammoth Hubbard, New Sweet Hubbard, 
Smooth Hubbard, Winter. 

Hubbard, the best known and most universally 
grown of all winter squash, owes its introduction to 
James J. H. Gregory of Marblehead, Massachusetts. 
The record of its early history was given several times 
by Mr. Gregory and one version contained in a letter 
of December 23, 1857, written to the Magazine of Hor- 
ticulture is here repeated. 

" Of the origin of the Hubbard squash we have no 
certain knowledge. The facts relative to its cultivation 
in Marblehead are simply these. Upwards of twenty 
years ago, a single specimen was brought into town, 
the seed from which was planted in the garden of a 
lady, now deceased; a specimen from this yield was 
given to Captain Knott Martin, of this town, who 
raised it for family use for a few years, when it was 
brought to our notice in the year 1842 or '43. We 
were first informed of its good qualities by Mrs. Elizabeth 
Hubbard, a very worthy lady, through whom we obtained 
seed from Capt. Martin. As the squash up to this 
time had no specific name to designate it from other 
varieties, my father termed it the ' Hubbard Squash.' " 

In a subsequent publication Mr. Gregory states 




HUBBARD 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



25 



that the first specimen was brought to Marblehead in 
1 798 from Boston by a market man named Green. 
The shape of the fruit brought the remark that it was 
" turned up like a Chinese shoe." It is most probable 
that this variety came to New England in the hands 
of a sea captain who secured it in trade from the West 
Indies or South America. In regard to its use the 
following was written soon after its introduction: " In 
the variety Hubbard are to be found many of the 
fundamental characters which as a table vegetable rank 
it with the onion and the turnip and for pastry purposes 
second only to the apple." 

The Hubbard has been repeatedly crossed with 
many varieties of squash. As a result of these crossings 
many modern stocks or strains will give a varied assort- 
ment of shapes and sizes even though they hold to the 
green color. The Blue Hubbard and Golden Hubbard 
have many of the characters of the Hubbard, varying 
chiefly in color, w r hile Kitchenette and Brighton came 
from a strain which had been selfed in 1914 by Richard 
Wellington at Minnesota. In 1860 the Massachusetts 
Horticultural Society presented a special gratuity to 
Mr. Gregory for the introduction of the Hubbard squash. 

This favorite and most widely known variety 
matured in 115 days at Geneva, 5 days earlier than 
Blue Hubbard, in season with Marblehead and 5 days 
later than Delicious and Golden Hubbard. The vines 
are less vigorous than those of Blue Hubbard and 
Chicago Warted Hubbard, and have smaller leaves and 
flowers. The fruits are slightly smaller than those of 
Chicago Warted Hubbard, distinctly smoother skin and 
have a lighter, less uniformly colored flesh. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, vigorous, 12—15 feet 
long; branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons moderately 
long and moderately broad, 2 3 4 x 1 3 4 inches; oval, apex moderately 
tapered ; veining moderately prominent ; color grayish green. Leaves 
very shallowly lobed, moderately large, 9 x 13 inches; margin 
denticulate, slightly serrated near the base of the blade, moderately 
frilled; color moderately dark green; petiole medium long and heavy, 
14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium size, 5-5 ] •_> inches across, 
pale orange yellow; ovary falcate-fusiform, very fuzzy; sepals 
short and slender, '_'- :! 4 inch; — staminate, moderately small, 
4, 1 L >-4 :! 4 inches across; sepals moderately short and slender, 3 4 inch; 
pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit medium large, 12-15 x 8-10 inches; weight 9 to 12 pounds. 
Shape falcate-fusiform, with the medial nearly globular; ribbed 
narrowly and irregularly; furrows shallow; surface slightly wrinkled 
and warted; blossom scar with button moderately prominent, 
1 j '■'■ , inch long. Skin color deep dull green : dark ivy green I often 
marked with pale green pea green I narrow stripes which radiate 
from the apex, varying from one-quarter to one-third the length of 
fruit, often inconspicuous or nearly absent. After storage the dark 
green is replaced with a dull bronze green idark olive). Fruit 
stalk medium long 2 ' -j-3 inches, round, curved, corky. Shell 
very hard, woody, thick, J 4 '- :1 s inch dime green i in color. Flesh 
medium thick at the medial, 1-1 '4 inches, often 2 inches near the 
apex and nearly solid at the base; texture fine, firm, crisp, dry; fine 
flavor, moderately sweet; quality excellent; color consists of a blend 
of yellow, greenish yellow and orange, maior portion is dull cadmium 
yellow). Seed cavity medium size, contains much placental tissue 
which is moderately moist, tender and easily removed. 

Seeds medium large; medium length and width and moderately 
plump, 1.9 x 1.17 x .37 cm. (112 per oz.)\ face smooth, glossy white; 
margin rounded, smooth. 



Kitchenette. Refs. 33, 40, 41, 73, 114, 122, 123, 129. 
Syns. Baby Hubbard, Kitchenette Hubbard, 
Little Hubbard. 

Kitchenette, the baby in size and age of Mother 
Hubbard's family, came as the result cf inbreeding a 
commercial strain of Hubbard. The work was initiated 
by Richard Wellington in 1914, at that time Horti- 
culturist at the Minnesota College of Agriculture. The 
second year's effort resulted in 47 self-pollinated fruits, 
seed of which was planted separately. Repeated self 
pollinations resulted in a number of lines which produced 
fruits uniform in many characters. Finally some 24 
lines were established and in 1919 three strains were 
distributed to a limited number of growers and experi- 
ment stations. Strain 20 was one of these and its 
continued use brought many favorable reports as to its 
desirability. In 1917 John W. Bushnell took over the 
experimental work on squash and was responsible for 
its final selection and naming. 

As a premium for membership it was distributed 
in 1920 by the Minnesota State Horticultural Society 
and given the name Kitchenette because of its small 
size. The next year it was offered by the Cashman 
Seed Co. of Owatonna, and C. J. Lindholm, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota. 

One hundred and ten days were required for this 
variety to reach maturity at Geneva, 5 days earlier than 
Hubbard, in season with Delicious and 10 days later 
than Quality. The vines are slightly less vigorous than 
those of Hubbard and have foliage lighter green in color 
and flowers with turbinate ovaries and distinctly larger 
sepals. The fruits are about the same size as Delicious 
and considerably smaller than those of Hubbard. They 
are much more abruptly tapered at the blossom end, 
usually more thickened and less curved at the neck 
than Hubbard. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, moderately light 
green and moderately vigorous, 10-12 feet; branches many, basal. 
Cotyledons moderately long and broad, 3x2 inches; oval; apex 
tapered; veining prominent; color grayish green. Leaves shallowly 
lobed, moderately small, 9 x 14 inches; margin somewhat undulate, 
denticulate and slightly frilled; surface smooth and occasionally 
somewhat crumpled: color moderately light green, very often having 
a silvery sheen; petiole moderately short, 12-14 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, medium large, 5-5 J ■> inches, yellow; ovary somewhat 
turbinated: sepals medium long and moderately slender, 1—1 J^ 
inches; — staminate, moderately small, 4— 1'_. inches across; sepals 
medium long and moderately slender, 1 inch. Pedicle moderately 
short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit small, 8-9 x 7 1 2~8 1 o inches; weight 5 to 7 pounds. 
Shape medial somewhat globular; base tapering abruptly to a 
short constricted neck, slightly curved; apex nearly flat to very 
slightly pointed, ribbed rather widely; furrows moderately deep; 
surface moderately wrinkled and warted. Blossom scar with 
button 1 4 1 ■_> inch long. Skin color deep green (dull greenish black 2) 
marked with narrow pale green ipea green) stripes which radiate 
from the apex one-third to one-half length of fruit and conform 
with the most prominent furrows. Fruit stalk moderately short, 
2 — 2 } 2 inches, round, slightly curved, rough and corky. Shell very 
hard and thick, ' 4 inch, pale green (lime green' in color. Flesh 
medium thick at the medial and apex 1-1 ) 1 inches, solid 2-3 inches 
at the base; texture very fine, dr>, crisp, tender; sweet, well flavored; 
quality good; color deep yellow cadmium yellow). Seed cavity 



26 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



moderately small, placental tissue moderately abundant, rather 
moist, somewhat fibrous, easily removed. 

Seed medium large; medium long and moderately narrow, 
plump, 1.94 x 1.1 x .44 cm. (80 per oz. I; face wrinkled, glossy white; 
margin rounded, smooth. 

Knobby Leviathan. Refs. 101, 121, 130. Syns. Heart 
O' Gold, Large Warted Portugal. 

In 1930 James J. H. Gregory & Son, Marblehead, 
Massachusetts, listed Knobby Leviathan. This was 
grown at Geneva and fruit specimens strongly resembled 
the illustration of Heart O' Gold published by Peter 
Henderson & Co., New York, thirty years earlier. 

Fruits were produced at Geneva in 120 days, in 
season with Blue Hubbard and 10 days later than 
Golden Hubbard. The plants are equally as vigorous 
as those of Golden Hubbard and have more blistered 
leaves. The fruits are more like Golden Delicious in 
general shape, have more angular shoulders and are 
decidedly rougher and more furrowed. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet. Leaves medium large, 10 x 15 inches, nearly entire, 
margin undulate; surface slightly blistered. 

Fruits large; 12-18 x 9-14 inches; weight 20-25 pounds, 
occasionally much heavier. Shape turbinate; ribbed very narrowly, 
furrowed deeply, surface wrinkled, often profusely corrugated; skin 
color orange and (flame scarlet.) Shell moderately soft and thin, 
Yt inch. Flesh thick at medial and apex 1 ' £ inches, very thick at 
base, 2-2 ' 2 inches; texture moderately coarse, slightly stringy, 
rather moist; fair flavor and sweetness, orange color; quality fair. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately narrow and 
medium plump, 1.93 x 1.04 x .34 cm. (128 per oz.); face smooth, dull 
white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Mammoth. Refs. 14, 19, 21, 24, 26, 27, 31, 33, 41, 

42, 44, 45, 50, 64, 73, 90, 101, 129, 130, 137. 
Syns. Big Jumbo, Big Show, Enormous, Genuine 
Mammoth, Giant, Giant of All, Globe Mammoth, 
Golden Yellow Mammoth, Hundredweight, 
Improved Mammoth, Jumbo, Jumbo Pumpkin, 
King of All the Mammoths, King of the Giants, 
King of the Mammoths, Large Mammoth, Large 
Mammoth Yellow Potiron, Large Yellow, Large 
Yellow Mammoth, Mammoth $50.00 Pumpkin, 
Mammoth King, Mammoth Prize, Mammoth 
Yellow, Mammoth Yellow Potiron, Michigan 
Mammoth, Mills Giant Pumpkin, Mills Giant 
Squash, Mohawk Valley Giant, Monster Yellow, 
New Mammoth Jumbo, Persian Golden Giant, 
Peruvian Mammoth, Potiron, Prize Potiron, 
Southern Mammoth, True Potiron, Yellow Mam- 
moth, Yellow Monster. 

This is the largest -fruited variety of Cucurbita 
grown and as commonly known is the leading example 
of the confused and dual use of the terms squash and 
pumpkin. These common terms have been applied inter- 
changeably to the many strains of this " Jumbo " of 
the vegetable kingdom. The many names under which 
this form has been grown indicate the popular fancy 
for any plant producing either foliage or fruits of an 
abnormal character. The fruits are commonly used for 
stock feed and this has served to keep the variety under 
cultivation. 



When Mammoth was first grown is not known, but 
the name does occur in trade lists as early as 1834. The 
large Potiron of Europe has long been popular and must 
have been among the early varieties brought from the 
New World to the Old. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 120 days, 
10 days earlier than Etampes, in season with Blue 
Hubbard and 5 days later than Hubbard. The vines 
are slightly less vigorous than those of Etampes, having 
darker foliage and decidedly smaller, less soft, and 
velvet-like flowers. The fruits are decidedly the largest 
of all C. maxima varieties, being more nearly globular 
than Etampes and more variable in skin color. 

Plant trailing; vines coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet; branches 
many, basal and medial. Cotyledons moderately long and broad, 
3x2 inches; oval; apex rounded; veining moderately prominent; 
color moderately light green. Leaves practically entire, very 
shallowly lobed, medium large, 10 x 16 inches; margin denticulate, 
slightly frilled; color moderately dark green; petiole medium long 
and moderately slender, 14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, moder- 
ately small, 4 1 ;) inches across, pale orange; ovary globular; sepals 
very short and moderately slender, 3 y- 1 _• inch: — staminate, moder- 
ately small, 4'_> inches across; sepals moderately short and moder- 
ately slender, 3 4 inch; pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit very large, 15-18 x 18-24 inches; weight 35-50 pounds, 
often much larger. Shape nearly globular, slightly depressed at 
the base, full at the apex; ribbed widely, furrows moderately shallow; 
surface moderately smooth, occasionally somewhat rough. Blossom 
scar with button ] g inch. Skin color orange (salmon orange to 
rufous I marked with moderately narrow, buff (light ochraceous 
salmon I stripes which radiate from the apex one-half to three- 
quarters length of fruit; often blotched with the same color. Fruit 
stalk moderately short, 2 ' _>-3 inches, round, slightly curved, rough 
and corky. Shell soft and thin, a, inch. Flesh thick, 1 ! L >-1 '■'■_, inches; 
texture coarse, moderately fibrous, very moist; quality poor; 
color variable, moderately light yellow to deep orange (pale ochra- 
ceous buff to deep chrome). Seed cavity very large, moderate 
amount of placental tissue which is moist, tough, stringy and 
difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, narrow and medium 
plump, 2.04 x 1.02 x .35 cm. (120 per oz.); face slightly wrinkled, 
glossy white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Mammoth Chili. Refs. 14, 21, 26, 27, 28, 33, 35, 

41, 50, 61, 73, 116, 129, 130. Syns. California 

Field, California Mammoth, Chili, Chilian Giant, 

Great Chili, Large Mammoth Chili, Large Yellow 

Chili, Mammoth Chili Winter, Mammoth Yellow 

Chili. 

The true Mammoth Chili was probably selected 

from the " Genuine Mammoth " as an earlier and slightly 

smaller strain. Seed stocks within this group have been 

undoubtedly interchanged rather freely and today it is 

rather difficult to find agreement as to the correct type 

represented by the name Chili. Certainly these large 

fruited cucurbits have been grown wherever the plant 

could be cultivated and in many instances have preceded 

the growing of other varieties of a higher quality. The 

type was known at the time of the earliest published 

seed lists. 

Mammoth Whale. Refs. 17, 26, 31, 32, 33, 41, 64, 
73, 101, 129, 130. 
This squash was brought from France and intro- 
duced in 1896 by W. Atlee Burpee 8s Co., Philadelphia. 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



27 



Although never very popular, it has been kept in trade 
lists more as a novelty than as a variety of merit. 

Mammoth Whale reached maturity at Geneva in 
120 days, 5 days earlier than Banana, in season with 
Winnebago and 5 days later than Hubbard. The vines 
are more vigorous than those of Banana, have larger, 
more glossy green leaves and tlowers which are distinctly 
more velvet-like, pubescent, frilled and curved at the 
margins. The fruits are much larger, more enlarged 
at the medial and more greenish gray in color. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet; 
branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons moderately long 
and very broad, 3'i x 2 :i s inches, oval; apex moderately rounded; 
color medium green. Leaves very shallowly lobed, medium large, 
10 n 15 inches: margin slightly serrated near the base, otherwise 
denticulate; surface smooth: color medium green, slightly glossy, 
petiole medium long, 14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium 
large. 5'_> inches across, orange; very soft and velvety, heavily 
pubescent, margins decidedly curved and crumpled; ovary some- 
what cylindrical, enlarged at the medial and slightly tapering towards 
base and apex; sepals very short and slender, ! 4 inch; — staminate, 
moderately small, 4 inches across; petals decidedly curved at the 
tip, deeply cut, moderately ruffled along the margin; sepals moder- 
ately short and moderately slender, V| inch; pedicle moderately 
short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit very large, 24-30 x 8-10 inches; weight 18-25 pounds- 
Shape somewhat cylindrical but much enlarged at the medial and 
moderately tapering towards base and apex; ribbed widely, furrows 
very shallow and indistinct; surface usually smooth, occasionally 
somewhat wrinkled. Blossom scar with button prominent, :! [— 1 
inch. Skin color greenish gray (storm gray) in the form of an 
irregular lace-like pattern over the entire fruit, blotched with 
pale gray light olive gray) in the areas between the mesh of the 
color pattern; also marked with gray (storm gray) streaks which 
radiate from the apex, one-half to two-thirds length of fruit. Fruit 
stalk medium long, 3^1 inches, round, straight, rough and corky. 
Shell moderately soft, moderately thick, ] v 1 j inch. Flesh moder- 
ately thick at the medial, 1 'j-1 ' 2 inches, thick at the base and apex, 
1 ' L >-2 inches; texture moderately fine, rather moist, tender, slightly 
stringy: fair flavor and sweetness; quality fair; color deep yellow 
dight cadmium). Seed cavity large, conforms to fruit shape; 
placental tissue abundant, moist, fibrous, not easily removed. 

Seed medium large; medium long and moderately broad, 
medium plump, 1.8 x 1.14 x .30 cm. (124 per oz.); face wrinkled, 
glossy white; margin very slightly ridged and corky, medial smooth. 

Marblehead. Refs. 8, 14, 21, 31, 33, 41, 46, 49, 50, 

51, 52, 59, 68, 70, 73, 94, 98, 101, 119, 120, 127, 
128, 129, 130, 132, 134. Syns. Improved Marble- 
head, Marblehead Mammoth, New Marblehead. 

Named and introduced in 1873 by James J. H. 
Gregory 8b Son of Marblehead, Massachusetts, this 
variety had been grown for many years in gardens of 
that section but as the stock was considerably mixed 
in color it had not been offered for sale. The original 
had been brought from the West Indies to the old 
seaport town by a Captain Sam Stanley. According 
to the story told by Mr. Gregory, some years later, a 
customer from some remote section sent in seed of an 
unknown sort. When grown this proved to be a pure 
strain of the sort discarded as mixed and the name 
Marblehead was then bestowed upon it. The variety 
never became popular, perhaps because of its slate gray 
to blue gray color. At that time the orange of the 
Autumnal Marrow and Essex Hybrid or the green of 



the Hubbard were the colors desired in a good winter 
squash. 

At Geneva 115 days were required to reach maturity. 
This was 5 days earlier than Blue Hubbard, in season 
with Hubbard and 5 days later than Delicious. The 
vines are slightly less vigorous than those of Blue 
Hubbard, and have darker green foliage. The fruits 
are smaller, smoother and more nearly globular at the 
medial than are those of Blue Hubbard, with the flesh 
thinner and slightly lighter in color. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, moderately vigorous, 
13-15 feet; branches moderately many, basal and medial. Coty- 
ledons medium long and moderately broad, 2 } 2 x l 5 s inches, oval; 
apex moderately rounded; color medium green. Leaves very 
shallowly lobed, medium large, 10 x 15 inches; margin slightly 
serrated near the base, otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled; color 
moderately dark green; petiole medium long, 14-15 inches. Flower 

— pistillate, moderately large, 6 inches across, pale yellow ; ovary 
somewhat fusiform, moderately constricted near the base and 
apex; sepals medium long and moderately slender, 1-1 J4 inches; 

— staminate, moderately small, 4 inches across; sepals medium long 
and moderately thick; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 12-14 x 9-10 inches; weight 8-10 
pounds. Shape medial nearly globular to short oval, abruptly 
tapering to a point at the apex and abruptly tapering towards the 
base; surface shallowly wavy and bumpy. Blossom scar with button 
1 1 ' j inch. Skin color bluish gray, (court gray) and during storage 
is replaced by a creamy gray (pale pinkish buff). Fruit stalk 
moderately short, 2 ' o-3 inches, round, rough and corky. Shell 
very hard and thick, J 1 inch, pale green (lime green) in color. 
Flesh medium thick at the medial, 1 inch, and thick at the base and 
apex, l 3 _i-2 inches; texture moderately fine, very firm, slightly 
tough, moderately dry; moderately sweet, fair flavor; quality 
moderately good; color pale orange (light orange yellow/. Seed 
cavity large, placental tissue moderately abundant, dry, stringy, 
easily removed. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long and medium broad, 
plump, 2.1 x 1.27 x .50 cm. (84 per oz.); face wrinkled, glossy 
white; margin rounded, smooth. 

Mediterranean. Refs. 14, 130. 

A fruit of this variety is illustrated in the 1889 cata- 
log of D. M. Ferry & Co., Detroit, Michigan. It was listed 
several years earlier by Johnson 8s Stokes and by Frank 
Ford 8b Son, Ravenna, Ohio. While the name Medi- 
terranean was given because it was brought in by a 
ship captain who made regular trips to that section of 
the world, it is probable that the specimens were picked 
up at some New World port of call on the homeward 
journey. 

The fruits of this variety were very much like those 
of Red China in shape, differing from that variety in 
being less depressed at the base, thicker, and lacking 
the prominent crown or acorn ring at the apex common 
to that variety. The skin color is somewhat more 
intense red and does not have the stripes of the Red 
China. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately vigorous, 12-15 feet. Leaves 
nearly entire, margin undulate, very often retuse at the apex, dull 
grayish green, sometimes blotched with gray, petioles long and 
slender. 

Fruit very small; 5-6 x 7-8 inches. Shape distinctly oblate, 
slightly depressed at base and apex; ribs and furrows practically 
absent; surface smooth; skin color deep salmon to scarlet; fruit 
stalk short and thick, corky, swollen at the medial. Flesh thick, 
sweet, dry, deep yellow in color. 



28 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Middleton Blue. Refs. 127, 134. 

When the Hubbard was first cultivated there was 
also a variety known to James J. H. Gregory 8s Son 
as Middleton Blue. This was considered to have come 
from South America and to have been crossed with 
Hubbard, the cross giving rise later to the Blue Hubbard. 
The Middleton was named for a town north of Boston 
where Gregory grew many of his seeds. Just how the 
Middleton differed from the Marblehead is not known. 

Ohio. Refs. 16, 50, 101, 137. Syns. Autumnal Marrow 
(Vilmorin), California Marrow. 

This name which is found in the 1883 edition of 
Les Plantes Potageres probably refers to a squash s*milar 
to Autumnal Marrow. Burr in 1863 mentioned the 
Courge d'Ohio of Vilmorin as a definite synonym cf 
Autumnal Marrow but Goff in 1883 gave them sep- 
arate descriptions, the chief separatory character being 
in the pock-marked appearance en the surface of Autum- 
nal or Boston Marrow fruits. This is additional evidence 
to indicate that there existed several slightly differing 
forms or strains of this popular variety. 

Many fruits of this variety were somewhat like 
Boston Marrow in shape, although usually more turbi- 
nate. The skin color was considerably lighter and the 
surface lacked the pebbled, pock-marked roughness 
common to that variety. 

Plant trailing: vines slender, pale green, vigorous, 16-20 feet; 
branches many. Leaves large, very shallowly lobed, deep green; 
margin sinuate, apex rounded; surface very smooth; petioles long 
and slender. 

Fruit moderately small, 12-14 x 8-9 inches; shape oval to 
somewhat turbinate, thicker at the base and tapering to the apex; 
ribbed broad; furrows moderately shallow and narrow; surface 
smooth. Skin color salmon pink marked with a small greenish 
area about the button; shell moderately hard. Fruit stalk short 
and thick, corky and soft. Flesh moderately thick, texture fine, 
dry, tender, well flavored, color orange; quality good. 

Olive. Refs. 14, 48, 49, 50, 101, 137. Syns. French 
Olive, New Olive. 

This is a squash which in shape resembles the fruit 
of the olive. The variety was listed by W. Atlee Burpee 
& Co. of Philadelphia in 1884 and by Gregory a year 
later. It was known to Vilmorin a few years earlier 
but the actual place of origin is unknown. This variety 
still carried in European lists was not offered after 1890. 

The shape of the fruit was very much like that of 
the Ohio, being somewhat more slender and definitely 
more tapered at the base. The skin color was apparently 
much like that of Black Zucchini summer squash. The 
leaves were more noticeably lobed than other maxima 
varieties and apparently had a more definitely tapered 
terminal lobe. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, very vigorous, pale green, leaves 
large, very shallowly lobed, apex distinctly tapered; margin coarsely 
undulate, surface very smooth, clear green; petioles long and slender, 
pale green. 

Fruit small, 10-12 x 5-6 inches; weight 6-10 pounds. Shape 
oval, somewhat pointed at the apex and rounded at the base; 
surface smooth; skin color dark green, finely mottled and shaded 
with yellowish green. Flesh moderately thick, very dry, sweet, 
well flavored, yellow; quality good. 



Opass. Syn. Japanese Turban. 

The Colorado Seed Co., Denver, Colorado, first 
listed this variety in 1932, the seed having been secured 
from a Japanese garde-ner. The peculiarly striped button 
or acorn-like blossom end is strikingly similar to fruits 
shown in a recent Russian publication (22). 

The variety matured at Geneva in 120 days, 5 
days earlier than Essex Hybrid, in season with Blue 
Hubbard and 5 days later than Bay State. The vines 
are slightly less vigorous than those of Bay State with 
leaves more coarsely blistered and marked with a silvery 
sheen on the foliage similar to that of Blue Hubbard, 
and flower petals which are more deeply cut and 
broadened at the apex than any other variety. The 
fruits are slightly larger than Bay State and Essex 
Hybrid, more regular and have a more prominent and 
regular blossom end scar with very distinct coloration. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet, moderately dark green, particularly near the base; 
branches few, basal. Leaves very shallowly lobed; margin slightly 
serrated at the base, otherwise denticulate; very slightly frilled; 
surface moderately smooth, occasionally somewhat coarsely blistered; 
color moderately dark green, often covered with a light silvery 
sheen; petiole moderately short, 12-14 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
medium large, 5-5 J 2 inches across, pale orange, ovary drum-like, 
pale green, mottled with creamy green; stigma much expanded, 
often four-lobed; sepals medium long and very slender, 1 inch; 
— staminate, small, 3 3 .1-4 inches, corolla deeply cut, margin frilled, 
apex of petals broad and tapering towards base as contrasted to 
tapered petals of most varieties; sepals moderately short and medium 
thick, 3 4-l inch; pedicle very short, 4-5 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-7 x 13-14 inches; weight 15-18 
pounds. Shape drum-like, distinctly flattened, depressed at the 
base and apex; ribbed rather narrowly; furrows moderately deep; 
surface bumpy, wrinkled, and pock-marked. Acorn very promi- 
nent, 5-5 ' 2 inches in diameter and has 3—4 projections, streaked 
with alternating, irregular bands, dull brown 1 tawny olive ' and 
various shades of cream 1 cream < and yellow honey yellow'. Skin 
color covered with a coarse irregular lace-like pattern of dark brown- 
ish green (olivaceous black); within the mesh, which varies in 
diameter from ys~ 1 2 inch, is salmon red (dragon's blood red'. 
Fruit stalk moderately short, 2 ' £-3 inches, slightly curved, distinctly 
tapering, rough, soft and corky. Shell moderately hard and thick. 
}4 inch. Flesh moderately thick at the base and medial, 1J^— lj^ 
inches, moderately thin at the apex, ! 4-l inch; texture medium 
fine, slightly fibrous, tender, slightly moist; moderately strong 
flavor; quality fair; color bright orange yellow 1 orange buffi. Seed 
cavity large; placental tissue medium amount, moderately dry, 
rather difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately large, moderately long, moderately narrow 
and moderately plump; face wrinkled, glossy white; margin rounded, 
smooth. 

Possum Nose. Refs. 14, 49, 50. 

W. Atlee Burpee & Co. of Philadelphia in 1884 
and James J. H. Gregory in 1885 cataloged this small 
fruited variety. Apparently it had little merit for it 
was not offered by the introducer after 1892. In the 
catalog of Wm. Henry Maule of Philadelphia for 1889 
is an illustration of Possum Nose which shows a fruit 
similar to that of Mammoth. This was also described 
in the catalog of Samuel Wilson, Mechanicville, Penn- 
sylvania, and J. A. Everitt of Indianapolis, Indiana. 
The description is based on the strain grown at Geneva 
by Goff. 




\ 



\ 



< 
W 

w 

« 



•^ 







TURKS CAP 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



29 



Plant trailing; vines moderately slender and vigorous; leaves 
medium large, often 15 inches broad, very shallowly lobed, margin 
denticulate, even; color clear green; petioles moderately slender. 

Fruit small; 6 7 x 9-10 inches; nearly globular to somewhat 
oblate, slightly depressed at the base; ribs obscure, furrows very 
shallow and narrow; surface smooth, occasionally slightly warted 
or uneven. Fruit stalk moderately short and thick, corky and soft. 
Skin color pale salmon marked with narrow, lighter, longitudinal 
stripes. Flesh thick, deep orange. 

Quality. Ref. 122. 

The name indicates a superior culinary product; 
and so it is, for the fruits, although rather blunt nosed 
and homely, are of delicious quality when cooked. 
The variety was named and first offered in 1914 by 
Joseph Harris Co., Coldwater, New York. An old 
customer found this growing in a field of Delicious and 
selected it for some years before its introduction. 

This variety is one of the earliest winter squashes, 
having matured in 100 days at Geneva, 10 days earlier 
than Delicious and in season with Boston Marrow. 
The vines are more vigorous than those of Delicious 
and, with the exception of having distinctly more ruffled 
flowers, are similar in other respects. The fruits are 
considerably broader in proportion to the length than 
are those of Delicious and by many are thought to be 
superior in quality. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet; 
branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons medium long and 
broad, 2 ' $ x 2 inches; broad oval; apex tapered; color medium green. 
Leaves medium large, 10 x 16 inches, shallowly lobed; margin 
denticulate, slightly frilled; color dark green; petiole medium long 
and moderately heavy, 14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium 
large, 5'_> inches across, lemon yellow; ovary turbinate; sepals 
moderately short and very slender, 3 4 inch; — staminate, medium 
large, 5 inches across, margin distinctly ruffled; sepals medium long 
and moderately heavy, 1 inch; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit small 6-7 x 8-9 inches; weight 5-6 pounds. Shape 
short broad cordate, depressed at the base, abruptly tapering towards 
the apex, ribbed widely; furrows moderately shallow; surface some- 
what wrinkled, pock-marked. Blossom scar with button '4 inch. 
Skin color dull green (dull greenish black 2 ) pock-marked with pale 
grayish green 1 court gray to light mineral gray). Fruit stalk 
moderately short, 2-3 inches, moderately straight, soft and corky. 
Shell moderately hard and medium thick, } % inch. Flesh medial 
and apex medium thick, 1-1 ^ inches, base thick, l 1 ^ inches; 
texture very fine, firm, tender, dry; sweet, excellent flavor; quality 
excellent; color orange (deep chrome to cadmium yellow). Seed 
cavity small; placental tissue medium, moderately dry, slightly 
stringy, moderately easy to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long and moderately narrow, 
medium plump, 1.9 x 1.0 x .35 cm. 120 per oz.); face finely wrinkled, 
glossy white; margin slightly rounded, smooth. 

Queensland Him-. Refs. 39, 40. 

This variety has shown promise when grown in 
trials at Geneva. Seed was procured from Australia 
in 1932 and produced vigorous plants with fruits quite 
different from any maxima found in American lists. 

It was one of the latest sorts, having required 140 
days to mature at Geneva. This was in season with 
Crown, 5 days later than Triangle and about 3 weeks 
later than Hubbard. The vines are much more vigorous 
than Hubbard, more profusely branched, larger leaved 
and have lighter yellow flowers with much longer pedicles. 
The fruits are similar in shape to Bay State, being 



more uniformly and deeply furrowed and much thicker, 
drier and more deeply colored of flesh. 

Plant trailing; vines coarse, very vigorous, 20-25 feet; branches 
very many, basal, medial and apical. Cotyledons medium long and 
moderately broad, 2 ' •_< x 1"$ inches; nearly rectangular; apex 
rounded; veining moderately prominent; color medium green. 
Leaves moderately large, 11 x 17 inches; very shallowly lobed; 
margin slightly serrated at the base, otherwise denticulate, moder- 
ately frilled; surface moderately smooth; color dark green; petiole 
long to very long and moderately slender, 18-22 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, medium large, 5} ■> inches across, bright lemon yellow; 
petals moderately erect; ovary drum-like, stigma very compact; 
sepals moderately short and slender, :! ( inch; — staminate, moder- 
ately small, 4' ■> inches across; petals distinctly curved; sepals 
medium long and medium heavy, 1 inch; pedicle long, 10-12 inches. 

Fruit small; 5-6 x 8-9 inches; weight 6-9 pounds. Shape 
drum-like, sides nearly perpendicular, slightly tapering towards the 
apex; distinctly depressed at the base, moderately depressed at the 
apex; ribbed narrowly; furrows medium deep; surface moderately 
smooth except for the furrow-like depressions. Blossom scar with 
button J i- 1 .' inch, situated in center of moderately large (3-3';< 
inches in diameter), circular, navel. Skin color dull green (dark 
olive gray to sage green) obscurely mottled with gray (storm gray). 
Fruit stalk long, 5-6 inches, curved, rough and corky. Shell hard 
and thin, jt inch. Flesh thick at the base and medial, 1 J 2-2 inches, 
medium thick at the apex, 1 inch; texture very fine, very firm and 
solid, dry; good flavor, moderately sweet; quality very good; color 
orange (deep chrome to capucine yellow). Seed cavity small 
towards the apex; placental tissue abundant, moderately dry, 
rather solid, difficult to remove, particularly from the seeds. 

Seed medium size; medium long, moderately broad and 
moderately plump, 1.76 x 1.17 x .40 cm. (120 per oz.); face smooth, 
moderately glossy brown (snuff brown); margin very distinct, 
rounded, smooth (cream buff). 

Red China. Refs. 14, 26, 27, 37, 48, 49, 50, 101, 108, 
130, 137. Syns. Hong-nan-kona, Japan Red 
Turban, New Red China, Red Cardinal, Small 
China Turban, Small Chinese Turban Gourd. 

First listed in this country by Tillinghast in 1885 
this small oblate squash came originally from China. 
The Museum of Natural History of Paris introduced 
the variety to France from whence it came to America. 
This was at the time when the small pepo types were 
being replaced by the large fruited and higher quality 
maximas. After 1896 the name seldom occurred in 
variety listing. 

Although somewhat smaller, the fruits of this 
variety were similar in shape to those of Queensland 
Blue, being more rounded at the medial and lacking the 
truncate shoulder at the base. The acorns are much 
alike, both usually being depressed slightly and not 
often protuberant. Nothing in common exists in color 
of skin since that of Red China most resembled that 
of the Warren. 

Plant trailing; vines rather slender, pale green, moderately 
vigorous; leaves moderately small, pale green, very shallowly lobed; 
petioles short and slender, pale green. 

Fruit very small; 3-4 x 6-8 inches; weight 2-3 pounds. Shape 
distinctly oblate, depressed at the base, flattened at the apex; 
broadly ribbed, furrows moderately shallow; surface occasionally 
warted; acorn prominent, 2-3 inches in diameter, marked with a 
corky ring about the periphery, small button present in center; 
skin color deep orange red, narrowly striped with yellow streaks. 
The depressed portion within the ring is sometimes green, often 
variegated with alternate irregular stripes of red, yellow and deep 
green. Flesh medium thick, fine texture, sweet, orange colored; 
quality good 



30 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Sibley. Refs. 10, 14, 21, 26, 27, 33, 38, 41, 47, 59, 64, 
73, 98, 107, 115, 118, 120, 129, 130. Syns. New 
Sibley, Pike"s Peak. 

The Sibley or Pike's Peak squash had a local 
reputation for many years but until 1887, when it was 
sent out by Hiram Sibley & Co., Rochester, New York, 
it was unknown in the trade. According to C. L. Allen 
it was found in the hands of an elderly lady in Van 
Dinam, Iowa, who had grown it for 50 or more years 
in Missouri. F. B. Van Orman of Iowa, a truck 
gardener, was also interested in its early development. 
The light brown color of the seed attracted the attention 
of eastern growers and it is possible that this was the 
first of the brown -seeded varieties to be cultivated in 
that section. 

Brown -seeded Winnebago is known to have come 
from an Indian source and Banana, also with brown 
seeds, is thought to have come from Mexico. The 
Sibley may then have had its origin from Indian 
agriculture. 

Sibley matured at Geneva in 120 days, in season 
with Blue Hubbard and 5 days later than Marblehead 
and Hubbard. Vines are much the same as those of 
Hubbard but have smaller flowers. The fruits are 
smoother than those of Marblehead and Blue Hubbard 
and very similar in color. 

Plant trailing; vines medium coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet; branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons medium 
long and broad, 2 g x 2 x .. inches; short oval; apex tapered; veining 
prominent; color grayish green. Leaves small, 9 x 12 inches, very 
shallowly lobed; margin slightly serrated near the base, otherwise 
denticulate, slightly frilled; surface moderately smooth; color 
moderately dark green; petiole moderately short and moderately 
slender, 12-14 inches. Flower — pistillate, small, 3j£-4 inches 
across; yellow ovary somewhat fusiform, slightly curved; sepals short 
and very slender, ' j inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4 1 j inches 
across; sepals moderately short and moderately slender, 3 4 inch; 
pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 10-12 x 8-9 inches; weight 8-10 
pounds. Shape obpyriform; ribbed rather narrowly; furrows 
shallow; surface smooth; blossom scar with button 'j- S 4 inch. 
Skin color bluish gray (court gray | which during storage is replaced 
with pinkish buff light ochraceous salmon). Flesh medium thick 
at medial, 1-1 '4 inches, base and apex slightly thicker; texture very 
fine, tender, slightly moist; slightly sweet and fair flavor; quality 
fair; color pale orange (orange buff); seed cavity moderately large; 
placental tissue abundant, moderately dry, tender, easily removed. 

Seed medium large; medium long and broad, moderately 
plump 1.87 s 1.06 x .41 cm. 124 per oz. 1 : face smooth, glossy 
brown dark fawn 2); margin distinct, slightly ridged, rounded, 
smooth, Jight buff 1 cream buff J in color. 

Tree. Refs. 14, 49, 50. Syn. Zapillito Del Trunco. 

James J. H. Gregory, Marblehead, Massachusetts, 
offered this variety in 1885 as a new sort from Brazil. 
Goff in the New York Agricultural Experiment Station 
Report for 1887 reports that it is " the only variety 
of C. maxima grown at the Station in which the vine 
is not distinctly running." This bush maxima has not 
been offered by the seed trade and the strain grown at 
Geneva in 1935 came from seed sent from Italy. 

Mature fruits of this variety were produced at 
Geneva in 90 days, the earliest of any maxima variety. 
This was 10 days earlier than Boston Marrow and 



Buttercup. The plants are unlike any other maxima 
variety in that it is a bush or semi-trailing type. After 
the crown set of fruit is well developed an occasional 
trailer is produced. This ordinarily occurs rather late 
and consequently any fruit which sets never obtains 
normal size. The mature fruits are much like those of 
Mediterranean and Red China in shape, and therefore 
entirely different than any modern sort. 

Plant bush, occasionally semi-trailing late in the season; stem 
short and coarse, rather vigorous grower, not branched ; vines when 
present 4-6 feet long. Cotyledons medium long and moderately 
broad, 2'_> x 1 :; 4 inches, short oval, apex rounded. Leaves nearly 
entire, moderately large, 12 x 15 inches; margin denticulate; surface 
nearly smooth: color medium green; petiole moderately long and 
heavy, 15-18 inches. Flowers — pistillate medium large. 5-6 inches 
across, lemon yellow; ovary oblate to somewhat globular, glossy 
green; sepals very short and thick, ' 2 inch; — staminate. moderately 
small, 4-5 inches across; sepals moderately short and very slender, 
3 4 inch; petals on both flowers deeply cut, rounded at the apex, 
with margins finely frilled and occasionally somewhat recurved. 

Fruit very small, 4-4 '_> x 6'_>-7 inches; weight 4— i 1 2 pounds. 
Shape drum-like, slightly depressed about the stem, moderately 
depressed about the apex; surface smooth, rather narrowly fur- 
rowed; blossom scar with small button, often surrounded with a 
corky ring. Skin color ivy green later rather bronze green, irregu- 
larly striped with dull salmon. Fruit stalk short, 1-2 inches, 
straight, rather slender, soft and corky. Shell moderately soft and 
thin. Flesh thin, ] 2- :; i inch, thickest at the medial, texture rather 
coarse, moist; pale orange in color. Seed cavity large, placental 
tissue chunky. 

Seed medium large, medium length, width and thickness, 
1.76 x 1.0 x .30 cm. 1 1 20 per oz. i; face smooth, dull white: margin 
rounded and smooth. 

Triangle. Refs. 39, 40. Syns. Shamrock, Triamble. 

In 1932 this variety with Crown and Queensland 
Blue were secured from Arthur Yates & Co. of Sydney, 
Australia. They have been described by Darragh in 
his recent publications and represent the three most 
common types of Australian pumpkin. When grown 
at Geneva they showed promise in both growth of plant 
and fruit and possess characters which may be of value 
to the plant breeder. 

This variety required 135 days to reach maturity 
at Geneva, 5 days earlier than Queensland Blue and 
Crown, and 20 days later than Hubbard. The vines 
are decidedly more vigorous than those of Hubbard, 
have larger leaves with more prominent auricles, and 
flowers with more irregular and curved petals. The 
fruits are unlike any other variety in shape, being 
trilocular and decidedly thicker fleshed at the base of 
the lobes; skin color similar to that of Marblehead and 
Blue Hubbard. 

Plant trailing: vines coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet: branches 
many, basal and medial. Leaves medium large, 10 x 16 inches, 
entire, nearly circular: margin denticulate, shallowly undulate; 
auricles distinctly ascending, often nearly vertically parallel; color 
moderately dark green, occasionally marked with a silvery gray 
sheen; petiole moderately slender and long, 18-20 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, medium large, 5 ' i inches across, often irregular with petals 
distinctly curved; stigma very compact, pale orange; ovary 3-lobed, 
triangular in cross-section; sepals long and slender, 1,2 inches: 
— staminate, moderately small, 4 inches across; sepals medium long 
and heavy, 1-1 J 4 inches: pedicle very long, 15-16 inches. 

Fruit small, 4-5 x 10-12 inches; weight 10-15 pounds. Shape 
trilocular, each locule developing separately, leaving large, deep 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



31 



furrows between them, arranged in a triangle, base deeply depressed 
and apex moderately so; surface smooth. Blossom scar with button 
depressed with a small navel surrounding it. Skin color bluish gray 
(court gray . Fruit stalk long, 5-6 inches, slightly curved, rough 
and corky. Shell moderately hard, moderately thin, ft ' , inch. 
Flesh thick to very thick at the base and medial, 1'_>-2'| inches, 
medium thick at the apex. 1 inch; texture moderately fine, slightly 
fibrous, somewhat granular, moderately dry; fair flavor and sweet- 
ness; quality fair; color pale orange (light cadmium to orange buff . 
Seed cavity small, conforms to shape of fruit, nearest to apex; 
placental tissue abundant, stringy, difficult to remove. 

Seeds moderately large; moderately long, moderately broad 
and plump, 2.0 x 1.34 x .60 cm. (84 per oz.!; smooth to slightly 
pitted, glossy brown snuff brown i; margin rounded, smooth, pale 
buff scream buff . 

Valparaiso. Refs. 1. 14, 21, 24, 26, 27, 42, 44. 48, 50, 
65. 92, 101, 102, 124, 130, 137. Syns. Commodore 
Porter, Commodore Valparaiso, Improved Lima 
Marrow, Lima Cocoanut, Salem Valparaiso, Val- 
paraiso Cheese. 
From the name given to this variety its origin may 
be attributed to South America and probably to Chili. 
The name is found in variety lists as early as 1857 and 
it probably was brought to this country by one of the 
early sailing vessels that made the long trip from New 
England harbors around the Cape and up the western 
coast of South America. Commodore Porter, often 
associated with Valparaiso, undoubtedly was responsible 
for its introduction. In early reports the name Val- 
paraiso has been associated with various types but the 
one here described is that given by Burr. 

Plant trailing: vines vigorous, 16-20 feet; leaves nearly entire, 
pale green, often having a grayish metallic appearance; margin 
denticulate and spiny. 

Fruit large, 16-20 x 12-14 inches; weight 20-25 pounds. Shape 
oblong to oval: ribbed broadly, furrowed moderately shallow; style 
persistent: surface smooth in early stage of growth but upon full 
maturity is profusely marked with cork-like netting and cracks 
over the ribs: skin color creamy white slightly tinged with gray. 
Flesh moderately thick, usually dry, sweet: delicate flavor, orange 
yellow; quality moderately good. 

Victor. Refs. 33, 41, 61, 64, 73, 129, 130. 

James J. H. Gregory & Sons, of Marblehead, Massa- 
chusetts, first cataloged Victor in 1897. No definite 
origin is known but, from the nature of the seedlings 
which were produced during the eight-year period that 
Gregory selected for uniformity, the parentage was 
thought to be Turban and Hubbard. Victor fruits are 
attractive in appearance, and the rich orange yellow, 
thickly warted, hard, flinty shell is quite unlike other 
varieties. The fruits are heavy, " handling like solid 
blocks of oak." Present day stocks seem mere oval than 
the original. The name " Victor " was chosen because 
of the many first prize ribbons awarded at agricultural 
exhibits. 

Maturity was attained with Victor in 125 days, in 
season with Essex Hybrid and Banana and 10 days 
later than Bay State and Hubbard. The plants are 
more vigorous than those of Essex Hybrid, with the 
leaves slightly more frilled and the flowers somewhat 
larger. The fruits are more profusely warted and usually 
lack the prominent blossom scar protuberance common 
to Essex Hybrid and Warren. 



Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet; 
branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons medium broad and 
long, 2 ;, | x 2 inches, oval; apex moderately tapering; color medium 
green. Leaves medium large, 10 x 15 inches; shallowly lobed; 
margin denticulate and distinctly frilled; surface moderately smooth, 
occasionally somewhat crumpled; color moderately dark green; 
petiole moderately short and moderately heavy, 12 14 inches. 
Flower — pistillate, moderately large, 6 ' j— 7 inches across, pale 
orange; distinctly ruffled and frilled with tips decidedly curled; ovary 
oval to somewhat turbinate, pale yellowish cream, mottled and 
streaked with pale green; sepals medium long and moderately 
slender, 1-1 '_> inches; — staminate, medium large, 5-5 ' 2 inches, 
distinctly ruffled and frilled; sepals medium long and moderately 
heavy, 1 ' 2 inches; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit small, 9-10 x 8-9 inches; weight 8-10 pounds. Shape 
nearly globular, depressed at the base and often slightly tapered 
at the apex; surface abundantly and deeply warted. Blossom scar 
with button 'j- :i 4 inch usually present, occasionally marked with 
a small depressed acorn. Skin color orange to orange red (mars 
orange to coral red). Fruit stalks medium long, 3-4 inches, curved, 
rough and corky. Shell hard and thick, } 4 inch. Flesh moderately 
thick at the base, slightly thinner at the apex and medial; texture 
fine, tender, moderately dry; moderately sweet, slightly insipid; 
quality fair; color deep yellow to orange cadmium yellow to deep 
chrome!. Seed cavity medium; placental tissue abundant, often 
chunky: moist, not easily removed. 

Seed medium large; medium long and broad, medium plump, 
1.88 x 1.2 x .34 cm. (142 per oz.), face wrinkled, rather dull white; 
margin rounded, smooth. 

Warren. Refs. 26, 28, 33, 41, 59, 61, 64, 73, 96, 117, 
129, 130. Syn. Improved Warren. 

This variety, which belongs to the turban group, 
was introduced in 1890 by James J. H. Gregory. The 
original plant, found by Mr. Warren of Marblehead, 
Massachusetts, in 1897, in a field of Essex Hybrid, 
produced three fruits which differed from the Essex in 
having a deeper orange color, thicker shell and a rougher, 
more warty appearance. Present stocks of this variety 
are often considered as an Improved Essex Hybrid for it 
is possible that the old Essex Hybrid strain no longer 
exists. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 120 days, 
5 days earlier than Essex Hybrid, in season with 
Blue Hubbard and 5 days later than Bay State. The 
fruits of this variety are consistently larger than those 
of Essex Hybrid, and usually have a less prominent 
blossom scar or acorn. 

Plant trailing: vines coarse, very vigorous, 15-18 feet, moder- 
ately dark green; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons 
medium long and moderately broad, 2' s x I s 4 inches, oval; apex 
tapered; color medium green. Leaves moderately large, 10 x 18 
inches, nearly entire, margin denticulate, slightly frilled; surface 
coarsely blistered to occasionally somewhat crumpled; color 
moderately dark green; petiole medium long and medium heavy, 
14—16 inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately large, 6-6? 2 inches 
across, yellow; ovary somewhat drum-like, pale creamy yellow in 
color; sepals medium long and moderately slender, 1 inch: — stami- 
nate, medium large, 5'_> inches across; sepals medium long and 
medium heavy, 1 inch; pedicle long, 10-12 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 9-10 x 12-15 inches; weight 16-20 
pounds; shape drum-like, distinctly flattened at the base, sides 
slightly tapered, somewhat flattened at the apex; surface bumpy 
and uneven, often profusely warted: acorn prominent, not usually 
protuberant. Skin color orange red I grenadine red to flame scarlet | 
with the acorn varying in color from cream to pale salmon pink 
pale ochraceous salmon to light ochraceous salmon 1. Fruit stalk 
medium long, 3-4 inches, curved round, rough and corky. Shell 



32 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



very hard and thick, J 4 inch, wood-like. Flesh thick to very thick 
at the base and shoulders, l 3 4-2} 4 ' inches, medial thick and apex 
thin, J_> _ ?4 inch; texture medium fine, often rather stringy, moder- 
ately dry, moderately tender; fair flavor and sweetness; quality 
fair; color deep yellowish orange (deep chrome). Seed cavity 
medium large, having much placental tissue which is moist and 
rather easily removed. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately broad, and 
moderately plump, 1.7 x 1.1 x .41 cm. (.112 per oz.); face wrinkled, 
glossy white; margin rounded and smooth. 

Warted Sugar Marrow. Refs. 27, 48, 101. Syns. 
Courge Brodee Galense, Warted Marrow, Warted 
Sugar. 

The picture of this squash shown in the 1930 catalog 
of James J. H. Gregory, Marblehead, Massachusetts, 
strongly resembles the illustration of the French squash, 
" Gourge Brodee Galense " shown in Les Plantes 
Potageres. The origin was given as of Bordeaux. Speci- 
mens grown at Geneva in 1933 were quite unlike other 
cucurbits and were strongly " embroidered " " Brodee " 
as indicated in the French description. 

One hundred and thirty days were required for this 
variety to produce mature fruits at Geneva; this was 
in season with Etampes and 15 days later than Hub- 
bard. The fruits are similar to Etampes in general 
shape but entirely distinct from any other variety in 
surface characteristics. 

Plant trailing; vines medium heavy, medium vigor, 8-12 
feet; branches many, basal and medial. Leaves small, 9x12 inches; 
very shallowly five-lobed, margin finely frilled; surface moderately 
smooth; color moderately dark green. Flower — pistillate, medium 
large, 5-5} 2 inches across, orange; corolla soft, velvet-like, petals 
distinctly curved and frilled; stigma slightly expanded; ovary 
globular, somewhat expanded at apex; sepals short and slender, 
'_> '4 inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4'_>-5 inches across, 
corolla less heavy; sepals medium large, 3 4 -l inch; pedicle short, 
4—5 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 7-8 x 12-14 inches; weight 12-14 
pounds. Shape distinctly oblate, depressed at base and apex; 
ribbed widely; furrowed shallowly; surface exceedingly profusely 
marked with large, very thick and heavy cork-like warts and cord- 
like netting over the entire area. Blossom scar very prominent, 
depressed, and lined about the periphery with a distinct corky ring. 
Skin color orange (rufousi, netting and warts gray (vinnaceous buff). 
Shell hard and medium thick, ' g inch. Flesh moderately thick, 
l ! i inches, thicker near the base; texture moderately fine, medium 
dry, tender; fair flavor, slightly sweet, color deep yellow (capucine 
yellow); quality fair. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately broad and 
medium plump, 1.84 x 1.3 x .30 cm. (124 per oz.); face moderately 
smooth, pale buff (tilleul buff); margin rounded and smooth, white. 

White Chestnut. Refs. 14, 26, 27, 64, 110, 130. Syns. 
Chestnut, White Hubbard. 

James J. H. Gregory 8s Sons of Marblehead, Massa- 
chusetts, who introduced this in 1890, wrote in the 
Rural New Yorker of 1898 that it had been introduced 
from semi-tropical regions. It was called " white " 
because it was the lightest in color of the hard shelled 
squash and " chestnut " because it cooked " dry as a 
boiled chestnut." 

Due to the widespread popularity of the Hubbard 
a number of varieties were introduced which were similar 
in many respects to that well known sort. White 
Chestnut was about the same size and shape of the 



original Hubbard. It differed from that variety in 
having a creamy white skin, much lighter than Marble- 
head, and a lighter, more lemon yellow flesh, which was 
fine in texture, dry, sweet, and of good quality. 

Wilder. Refs. 24, 44. Syn. Stetson Hybrid. 

Sometime about 1855 the Wilder squash was pro- 
duced by A. W. Stetson of Braintree, Massachusetts, 
as the result of a cross between Valparaiso and Autumnal 
Marrow. The name Wilder comes from the Hon. 
Marshall P. Wilder, one of the leading horticulturists 
of his time. For some reason the variety never was 
widely grown, possibly because the good qualities of 
the winter squash group were little known. 

The fruits were usually similar in shape to Olive, 
although often irregular. The skin color was similar 
to that of Autumnal Marrow but the surface apparently 
lacked the pebbled, pock-mark irregularities common to 
that variety. The flesh was more salmon tinted and 
apparently was inferior to Autumnal Marrow and Hub- 
bard as a baking variety, but admirably adapted for pies. 

Plant trailing; vines vigorous. 

Fruit medium large, 12-30 pounds. Shape oval, but often 
rather irregular; ribbed broadly; furrowed shallowly, often obscurely; 
style persistent. Fruit stalk curved, large, corky; skin color reddish 
yellow, similar to that of Autumnal Marrow. Flesh thick, sweet, 
well flavored, salmon yellow in color. 

Seeds white. 

Winnebago. Refs. 33, 40, 41, 73, 129. 

This is another of the squash collected by Dr. M. 
R. Gilmore of the Museum of Anthropology of the Uni- 
versity of Michigan. In was introduced in 1921 by 
Oscar H. Will & Co. of Bismarck, North Dakota. The 
Winnebago Indians of Nebraska had the original seed 
which was given by them to Dr. Gilmore. Of rather 
unusual shape, like an elongated Hubbard, it has many 
of the qualities of that standard variety. 

Winnebago reached maturity at Geneva in 120 days, 
5 days earlier than Banana, in season with Mammoth 
Whale, and 5 days later than Hubbard. The vines are 
less vigorous than those of Banana, and have slightly 
larger leaves and lighter yellow flowers which are more 
frilled. The fruits are slightly longer than those of 
Banana and have a much rougher surface and a darker 
skin color. 

Plant trailing; vines rather coarse, moderately vigorous, 
10-12 feet; branches moderately few, basal. Cotyledons medium 
long and very broad, 2 3 4 x 2% inches; short oval to nearly round; 
apex tapered; color medium green. Leaves medium large, 10 x 15 
inches, very shallowly lobed; margin denticulate, very slightly 
frilled; surface moderately smooth; color medium green; petiole 
moderately short, 12-14 inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately 
large, 6 inches across, lemon yellow, margins frilled, ovary long 
fusiform; sepals short and very slender, \ 2 inch. — staminate, 
moderately small, 4— 4'_> inches; margin frilled; sepals short and 
moderately slender, :i 4 inch; heavily pubescent; pedicle very short, 
3 3 2—4 inches. 

Fruit medium large, 20-24 x 7-8 inches: weight 12-16 pounds. 
Shape elongated, somewhat cylindrical; tapering gradually to the 
base and rather abruptly towards the apex; surface wrinkled, 
irregularly ridged and somewhat warty and uneven. Blossom 
scar with button long, 1-1 ' _> inches. Skin color dull green dull 
greenish black) marked with gray court gray stripes which radiate 






4 



X 



r^ 



<m 








(Two-thirds natural size) 



WARREN 








ENGLISH VEGETABLE MARROW 





(Two-thirds natural size 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



33 



from the apex three-quarters length of fruit, and small irregular 
blotches of the same color; during storage the stripes and blotches 
change to pale pink (light congo pink ) and the green to bronze 
gray flight drab). Fruit stalk moderately short, 2'j-3 inches, 
moderately straight, rough and corky. Shell moderately hard, thick, 
'|- :1 S inch. Flesh moderately thin at the apex and medial, :1 i~l 
inch: base moderately thick, 1>.| inches; texture very fine, tender, 
moderately dry; fair flavor, slightly sweet; quality fair to moderately 
good; color pale orange (orange buff to apricot yellow'. Seed 
cavity large, conforms to shape of fruit; placental tissue medium 
amount, moist, tender, rather difficult to remove. 

Seed large; long, narrow and plump, 2.3 x 1.2 x .55 cm. (72 per 
oz.1; face cracked and pitted, brown i snuff brown); margin ridged, 
slightly corky, between ridges smooth, pale buff (cartridge buff). 

CUCURBITA PEPO 

Varieties of this species were in common use among 
the Indians at the time of our early colonization. At 
that time the prototypes of our present day varieties, 
Bush Scallop, Perfect Gem and Connecticut Field, were 
known and recorded by early writers. In 1806 McMahon 
recorded the existence of many sorts, but mentioned no 
variety names, although his warted squash, listed as 
Cucurbita verrucosa, may have been a summer crook- 
neck. The vegetable marrow first appeared in catalogs 
in 1824 when Thorburn listed it. In 1847 Apple was 
introduced by Hovey, and Patagonian by Thorburn, 
while Para and Custard did not appear in catalog lists 
until about 10 years later. Records during the period 
1825 to 1860 are rather incomplete, consequently it 
is not known just when such varieties as Nantucket, 
Small Sugar, Bergen and Variegated Bush Scallop 
appeared. Since Burr, in 1863, included these in his 
" Field and Garden Vegetables of America " they were, 
obviously, accepted as distinct sorts at or before this 
time. 

As in the case of varietal development of the maxi- 
mas, the greatest activity in pepo introductions was 
shown from 1880 to 1900. During this period Fordhook, 
Perfect Gem, Pineapple and Delicata were among the 
small fall squashes introduced. The large-fruited winter 
pumpkins such as Winter Luxury, Golden Oblong, 
Gibson and Dunkard were all listed for the first time 
between 1890 and 1900. At the same time a con- 
siderable advance in the development and introduction 
of summer squash was made, as evidenced by the fact 
that Earliest Prolific, Mammoth White Bush Scallop, 
Long Island White Bush Scallop and Giant Summer 
Straightneck were first introduced. The past 30 years 
have seen the introduction of Table Queen in 1913 
Boston Greek in 1918, and Zucchini in 1921. During 
this period three Indian varieties from the northern 
plains region were named and introduced as Mandan, 
Fort Berthold and Omaha, thereby emphasizing the 
fact that the species had long been known by the early 
Americans. 

The greatest diversity in fruit and plants of the 
three species discussed in this chapter occurs within the 
pepos. In size they range from the apple-like Perfect 
Gem to the mammoth Tours and Sandwich Island, while 
fully as great a divergence exists in plants, as shown by 
the bush-like habit of the scallops and the exceedingly 



coarse, vigorous growth of the aforementioned mammoth 
varieties. The great variety of colors and color patterns 
have also contributed to the interest of the group. 

The utility of the pepos has been and still is rather 
varied. Early records do not make a very clear dis- 
tinction between some of these and the gourds, but the 
Indians are said to have used the dried shell of the warted 
summer crookneck as a rattle during their ceremonial 
dances; and certain varieties such as Cocoanut and 
Illinois Beauty, in addition to their usefulness as food, 
often served as colorful ornaments during the latter part 
of the nineteenth century much as the ornamental gourds 
are used today. From the standpoint of food use, all 
varieties can be listed in one of four groups: First, the 
so-called summer squashes (including the various 
scalloped sorts, the vegetable marrows and the warted 
crooknecks), which are used in the immature stages; 
second, the fall squash or individual group (includ- 
ing Black Michigan, Delicata and Table Queen), which 
produce firmer flesh than the preceding group and are 
much esteemed for baking in the half-shell; third, the 
winter pumpkins which are grown for storage and 
largely used for pies (including Winter Luxury, Small 
Sugar, Golden Oblong and Connecticut Field, the latter 
two often used in blending with the stiffer squash varie- 
ties in the manufacture of pie stock); and last, and least 
desirable, those varieties sometimes grown for stock food, 
among which are Sandwich Isle and Tours. 

Sixty varieties are treated in more or less detail in 
this analysis. No attempt has been made to include the 
many English types of vegetable marrows, nor has it 
been possible to consider other foreign types unless they 
were introduced into the trade channels of our seed 
industry. 

Alexandria. Ref. 130. 

This variety originated sometime prior to 1902 with 
F. B. Van Ornam who was supposed to have secured the 
seed from Alexandria, Egypt. The fruits were shaped 
similar to those of Fordhook without the ridges and fur- 
rows. It was about the same size, very smooth and hard 
shelled. It was dropped from trade lists 4 or 5 years later. 

Apple. Ref. 24. Syn. Early Apple. 

Hovey & Co. of Boston, Massachusetts, listed this 
unusual squash variety from 1847 to 1857. Burr in 
1863 describes the fruit as obtusely conical, three inches 
broad at the stem and two and a half in depth. The 
skin yellowish white, tender while the fruit is young, 
but shell-like when ripe. This, the smallest fruited 
squash recorded in early lists, may have been the pre- 
cursor of Perfect Gem, a popular sort forty to fifty 
years later. 

Black Michigan. Refs. 11, 30, 59, 69, 97, 130. Syns. 
Iron Clad, Para, Polk. 
The Vaughan Seed Store, Chicago, Illinois, listed 
and illustrated in their catalog of 1905 this distinct 
fall and winter variety. According to the information 
describing the new novelty, seed had been procured 
from a gardener in New Haven, Connecticut, who had 



34 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



grown it successfully for many years. Specimens grown 
in 1935 from seed taken from a squash sent here by a 
Connecticut seedsman produced fruit like the picture 
in the catalog and also in the booklet " Squashes and 
How to Grow Them," etc. published by Gregory in 
1893 under the names Para and Polk Squash. In 1859 
the name Polk is listed in the catalog of Hovey & Co. 
of Boston. The name Para is of South American origin 
but the variety was seemingly never very widely grown. 
The fruits of this variety are most like those of 
Illinois Beauty in shape but are less tapered at the 
base. The uniformly greenish black skin serves to 
further distinguish it from this variety and Delicata. 
The plants are very slow growers and less vigorous than 
those of Delicata, also lack the silvery sheen leaf char- 
acteristic of the latter variety. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, weak grower, 5-6 
feet; branches moderately few; semi-bush in early stages, later 
become trailing. Leaves broadly 5-lobed, sinuses deep and narrow. 

Fruit very small, 10-12 x 3-3}? inches; weight 2-2 } o pounds; 
shape oblong, cylindrical, apex full, base slightly depressed; ribbed 
moderately narrow; furrows shallow; surface rather uneven, slightly 
bumpy; skin color dark green over entire surface with the exception 
of area adjacent to ground which is orange (salmon orange). Fruit 
stalk short, 1 J £—2 inches, moderately slender, shallowly furrowed, 
hard and woody, expanded at the base. Shell very thin, tj - A 
inch, indefinite, firm. Flesh moderately thin, 3 4-"s inch, slightly 
thicker at the base, very firm texture, moderately dry, sweet, well 
flavored, pale orange (orange buff) ; quality good. 

Seed small; short, broad and flat, 1.15 x .75 x .18 cm. (460 per 
oz.); surface moderately smooth, light buff; margin wedge-like, 
slightly curved and twisted. 

Black Zucchini. Ref. 86. Syns. Green Bush Tripoli, 
Long Dark Green Bush Marrow Tripoli, Wesley's 
Cocozelle. 

This dark skinned variety has only within the last 
few years become popular on the West Coast and on 
certain markets in the east. It was listed in 1931 by 
the Jerome B. Rice Seed Co., Cambridge, New York, 
by Alexander Forbes & Co., Newark, New Jersey, and 
others in 1933. The stocks as offered by these seed 
houses are somewhat different in shape. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 58 
days, 5 days later than Zucchini and 3 days later than 
Italian Vegetable Marrow. The plants are more vigorous 
than those of Zucchini with the leaves slightly larger, 
slightly less finely parted and decidedly darker green. 
The fruits are much longer and more slender, and have 
a distinctly darker, more uniformly colored skin. 

Another sort bearing the name Rice's Black Zucchini 
is entirely distinct from the one considered in detail in 
this account. Mature edible fruits are obtained 5 days 
earlier and are much thicker in proportion to their length. 
The foliage is decidedly less cleft, being very similar 
in outline to those of White Bush Scallop. 

Plant bush; central stem moderately coarse, very dark green; 
branches moderately few, basal; moderately vigorous. Cotyledons 
medium long and moderately broad, 2 3 4 x 132 inches; oval; apex 
tapered; color dark green. Leaves small, 10 x 12 inches, rather 
narrowly 7-Iobed, each lobe having many sub-sinuses; sinus rounded 
at the base, somewhat lacerated; margin incised near the base of 
the blade, otherwise serrated; color dark green; petiole medium long 
and moderately slender. 15-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium 



large, 5-6 inches across, orange; ovary cylindrical, very symmetrical; 
sepals very short and slender, 'j inch; — staminate, moderately 
small, 4-5 inches across; sepals medium long and moderately heavy, 
1 inch; pedicle very short, 4-5 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 15-18 inches long, 2J4 _3 M inches 
in diameter at the base and 2 :t 4 -3 3 4 inches at the apex; shape nearly 
cylindrical, slightly curved and very slightly enlarged at the apex; 
ridged slightly at the base; surface smooth; blossom scar with small 
button, J4 inch. Skin color very dark green, almost black (dull 
greenish black) obscurely specked and finely mottled with pale 
greenish yellow (light dull green yellow). Interior pale greenish 
white (pale glass green). Mature fruit moderately small, 22-26 
inches long, 3J 4 -43 _> inches in diameter at the apex and 3 J 2-3% 
inches at the base; weight 7-9 pounds. Shape much the same when 
mature edible. Skin color uniformly and finely laced with dark 
green (dull blackish green), concentrated at the ridges to form a 
very dense, nearly solid, narrow stripe of the same color; ground 
color which appears within the mesh of the lace-like color pattern 
is pale orange yellow (light cadmium). Fruit stalk very short, 
3 4 inch, deeply ridged and distinctly expanded at the point of 
attachment. Shell moderately hard and thin, 3^ inch, greenish 
yellow (glass green). Flesh coarse, granular and soft, moderately 
thin, 3 4 inch, pale buff yellow I maize yellow). 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium broad and 
moderately plump; 1.49 x .77 x .28 cm. (260 per oz.); face smooth, 
dull white, (pale olive buff), margin wedge-like. 

Boston Greek. Ref. 86. 

This is a summer bush squash which was introduced 
from Southern Europe in 1918 by Joseph Breck & Sons of 
Boston, Massachusetts, who listed it upon recommenda- 
tion of friends. It is grown to a limited extent near 
eastern markets. It is believed by many to be superior 
in quality to others in its class and when cooked it 
assumes a more delicate and attractive green color. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 52 
days, 1 day earlier than Zucchini and 2 days later than 
Earliest Prolific. The plants are more vigorous than 
those of Zucchini, with distinctly lighter green stalks 
and slightly larger leaves which are darker green in 
color and decidedly less blotched with gray. The fruits 
are distinctly lighter green in color, but otherwise are 
much like those of Zucchini in shape. 

Plant bush: central stem moderately heavy, light green; 
branches many, basal; spread 4 feet, vigorous. Cotyledons moder- 
ately short and moderately narrow, 2 3 s x I 3 * inches; oval; apex 
moderately rounded; color dark green. Leaves moderately small, 
12 x 12 inches; rather narrowly 5 to 7-lobed, each lobe having 
many sub-sinuses; sinuses rounded at the base, rather narrow, 
lacerated; margin slightly incised near the base of the blade, other- 
wise serrate; surface moderately smooth; color dull dark green; 
petiole medium long and slender, 14—15 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
moderately large, 6 3 2 inches across, orange: ovary cylindrical; 
sepals very short and slender, J 4 inch; — staminate, moderately 
large, 6 inches across; sepals medium long and heavy, 1?4 inches; 
pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 10-12 inches long, 3 J 2— 4 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 3-3} 4 inches at the base; shape somewhat 
cylindrical, gradually enlarging towards the apex; ribbed slightly 
at the base; surface smooth. Blossom scar with button very small. 
Skin color effect light green; ground color pale yellow isea foam 
yellow to margarite yellow) profusely marked with a moderately 
light green (light bice green) lace-like color pattern over the entire 
fruit. Interior pale greenish white (pale glass green). Mature 
fruit small, 12-14 inches long, 4 '4 4 ' 2 inches in diameter at the apex 
and 3 1 .-3 '4 inches at the base; weight 4-4 ' 2 pounds. Shape much 
the same when mature edible. Skin color uniformly and finely 
laced with a pale orange yellow (orange buff! lace-like color pattern; 
ground color pale cream (Naples yellow). Fruit stalk short, l 3 |-2 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



35 



inches, deeply ridged and distinctly expanded at the point of attach- 
ment. Shell hard, brittle and thin, ,'„ inch, somewhat thicker at the 
base; pale yellow istraw yellow 1 . Flesh very coarse, granular and 
soft; moderately thin, ;! , 1 inch, pale creamy yellow straw yellow . 
Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium broad and 
medium plump, 1.46 x .79 x .34 cm. (248 per oz.V, face smooth, dull 
white [cartridge buff 1 ; margin wedge like, nearly smooth. 

Brazilian Sugar. Refs. 14. 26, 31, 48. 50, 64, 101, 121, 

130, 137. Syns. Brazil Sugar, Brazilian, Brazilian 

Sugar Gourd. 

As a novelty this was offered in 1885 by W. Atlee 

Burpee & Co., Philadelphia, but had little success as a 

commercial variety. It was discontinued in 1904. The 

fruits of this variety are most like those of Der Wing 

in shape, differing from that variety in being larger and 

orange yellow in color instead of white. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, pale green, vigorous; branches 
many, basal and medial. Leaves 5-lobed, very dark green; 
surface distinctly blistered and crumpled; margin finely dentate; 
petiole moderately short and slender, pale green. 

Fruit very small; 5-6 x 4-5 inches; weight 2-3 pounds. 
Shape oval; ribbed obscurely; furrows very shallow, irregular, more 
prominent at extreme base; surface profusely warted; skin color 
pale yellow turning deep orange at full maturity; fruit stalk moder- 
ately short, slender, grooved and somewhat tapered; shell very hard 
and thick, woody. Flesh thick, very sweet, yellow. 

Cocoanut. Refs. 12, 14, 21, 24, 26, 31, 34, 37, 46, 47, 
49, 50, 56, 59, 61, 64, 82, 118, 120, 130, 132. 
Syns. Cocoa-nut, Little Cocoanut, Small Cocoa- 
nut. 
This was one of the most popular small fruited 
squash listed. It was offered by James J. H. Gregory 
& Sons, Marblehead, Massachusetts, in 1869 and was 
compared in flavor to the Canada Crookneck. The 
fruits were quite handsome and often were used like a 
gourd as a mantel decoration. The variety outlasted 
most of the other small fruited sorts and was cataloged 
by Gregory until 1923. 

At Geneva this variety reached edible maturity 
in 90 days, which was 4 days later than Table Queen, 
10 days later than Delicata and 6 days earlier than 
Black Michigan. The fruits are unlike any other indi- 
vidual fall squash, having a distinct shape and color 
pattern. Some of the fruits are similar in shape to 
Table Queen, but the accepted type is much less furrowed 
and more globular. 

Plant trailing; vines very dark green at the base, coarse, 
vigorous, 6-8 feet, moderately branched at the base. Leaves 
moderately small, 10 x 13 inches, broadly 5-cleft, with terminal 
lobe having two pair of sub-sinuses; sinuses deep, acute, very narrow; 
margin incised near the base, otherwise serrated, finely frilled; 
surface profusely and coarsely blistered, distinctly dark glossy 
green; petioles very short and medium heavy, 7-9 inches. 

Fruit very small, 6-7 x 5-6 inches: weight 2' 2 -3 pounds. 
Shape nearly globular to cordate, depressed at the base; ribbed 
widely; furrows moderately deep and broad; surface smooth except 
for the longitudinal ridges; skin color yellow I light orange yellow) 
along the ribs and orange mikado orange) irregularly striped, 
extreme apical area bright green cress green), circular in outline, 
very definite. Fruit stalk short, curved, furrowed, woody and tough. 
Shell soft and thick, } 4 -i\ inch. Flesh :i 4 -l inch, thick for the size 
of fruit, fine texture, moderately dry, tender, fair flavor, moderately 
sweet, pale orange I light orange yellow i; quality moderately good. 



Seed small; short, broad and flat, 1.2 x .84 x .20 cm. (336 per 
oz.); face smooth, pale buff (pale ochraceous salmon i; margin 
wedge-like. 

Cocozelle. Refs. 26, 27, 31, 33, 41, 47, 62, 73, 86, 

89, 95, 117, 129, 130. Syns. Cocozella, Cocozella 
di Napoli, Cocozelle Bush. 

This name is used to represent one of the most 
popular of the Italian Marrows. The Associated Seed 
Growers, New Haven, Connecticut, offered in 1934 a 
Long Cocozelle and a Short Cocozelle, both strains 
finding adherents in certain markets. The type is a 
true bush squash in which respect it differs slightly 
from the Italian Vegetable Marrow which was the first 
name used for any variety in the group. 

The variety is very similar to Italian Vegetable 
Marrow and differs from that variety in having smaller, 
more slender fruits which are much less ridged at the 
base, more prominently striped with greater contrasting 
colors and borne on plants which are much less vigorous. 
Two strains, Short Cocozelle and Long Cocozelle, are 
grown. These differ only in the length of fruits pro- 
duced. The following account refers to the short strain. 

Plant bush; central stem moderately coarse, short and moder- 
ately vigorous; branches few, basal and medial. Leaves moderately 
small, 11 x 13 inches, broadly 5-cleft; sinuses narrow and acute; 
margin dentate, slightly incised near the base; color dark dull green, 
occasionally some plants sparsely blotched with gray. Flower — 
pistillate, large, 7 inches across, orange; ovary cylindrical; sepals 
very short, J^ inch; — staminate, large, 7-8 inches across; sepals 
medium long and moderately heavy, 1 inch; pedicle moderately 
short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage very small, 10-12 x 3'_>-4 inches, 
nearly cylindrical, very slightly enlarged at the apex, ribbed widely 
and very shallowly, most prominent at base: surface smooth. Skin 
color alternately striped in rather definite lines with very dark 
green dull greenish black i and pale greenish yellow barium yellow I 
both of which appear as a fine lace-like pattern. Mature fruits 
considerably larger, 16-18 inches long, 4-5 '^ inches in diameter at 
the tip and 3 3 4 — 4 inches at the base; shape the same; skin color 
practically the same dark green shade, but the lighter shade changed 
to yellow i cadmium yellow I and the ground color to pale yellow 
margarite yellow). 

Connecticut Field. Refs. 14, 19, 21, 24, 27, 28, 31, 

32, 33, 41, 42, 50, 59, 64, 73, 121, 129, 130. Syns. 
Big Tom, Canners Supreme, Common Field, Com- 
mon Yellow, Connecticut Cornfield, Connecticut 
Golden Field, Connecticut Yellow Field, Cow, 
Eastern Field, Georgia Field, Golden Marrow, 
Indiana Field, Jack O'Lantern, Lake Shore, Large 
Common Field, Large Connecticut Field, Large 
Connecticut Yellow Field, Large Cornfield, Large 
Field, Large Yellow, Mammoth Field, Michigan 
Mammoth, Pure Gold, Southern Field, Vermont 
Pumpkin, Western Field, Yankee, Yankee Field, 
Yankee Pie. 
The common field pumpkin in New England can be 
traced back traditionally to the early settlements. Field 
and pie pumpkins and a form of summer squash and 
Cushaws were the first of the cucurbits grown on our 
farms or in our kitchen gardens. For over 200 years 
the pumpkin occupied the principal place in the variety 
lists of this vegetable and the group described by Burr 



36 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



represented forms which had been segregated into 
separate varieties. Of the larger forms Burr mentioned 
four: Canada, Common Yellow, Connecticut Field and 
Long Yellow. Records are not available as to how, 
when and where these separate forms may have arisen. 
Today Connecticut Field is the chief representative of 
the group and is the variety grown on the majority of 
farms which have use for this vegetable. 

Mature fruits of this variety were obtained at 
Geneva in 120 days, in season with Golden Oblong and 
20 days later than Small Sugar. The vines are similar 
in most characters to Golden Oblcng but have flowers 
with ovaries more nearly globular. The fruits are similar 
in color, but those of Connecticut Field are more globular 
and have flesh which is lighter in color and more moist. 

Plant trailing: vines medium heavy, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet: branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons medium 
long and moderately broad, 2 3 4 x 1 3 4 inches; long oval; apex moder- 
ately rounded: color medium green. Leaves moderately large, 
12 x 15 inches; broadly 5-lobed, terminal lobe having a few sub- 
sinuses; sinuses moderately shallow, narrow and rounded at the base; 
margin serrated, slightly incised near the base; surface moderately 
smooth, occasionally somewhat crumpled; color moderately dark 
green; petiole medium long and heavy, 15-16 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, moderately large, 6}*£— 7 inches across, light orange; 
ovary globular to short cylindrical; sepals very short and moder- 
ately slender, J 4 inch; — staminate, moderately large, 6 inches 
across: sepals medium long and moderately heavy, 1 inch; pedicle 
moderately long, 9-10 inches. 

Fruit moderately large, 10-18 x 10-14 inches, weight 18-25 
pounds. Shape variable, some nearly globular, slightly depressed 
at base and apex and others long oval, more or less rounded or full 
at base and apex; ribbed rather narrowly; furrows moderately 
shallow; surface smooth. Blossom scar prominent, 1-1 3 4 inches 
in diameter. Skin color lochraceous orange to xanthine orange). 
Fruit stalk medium long, 3-4 inches, slightly curved, rough, ridged, 
woody and tough, somewhat expanded at attachment. Shell 
moderately soft and medium thick, J s— Vs inch. Flesh thick at the 
medial and base, 1 ' >-2 inches, moderately thick at the apex, 1 J 4 -l ' 2 
inches; texture rather coarse, somewhat granular, soft, moist, 
moderately fibrous; slight flavor and sweetness; quality poor; color 
pale cream warm buff to buff yellow 1. Seed cavity large, placental 
tissue moderately abundant, somewhat stringy, easily removed. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, moderately narrow 
and medium plump, 2.00 x 1.10 x .30 cm. (128peroz.); face smooth, 
dull white 1 ivory yellow); margin wedge-like. 

Custard. Refs. 24, 44, 59, 125. Syn. Banana. 

This variety with rather coarse appearing fruits 
was one of the earliest cultivated forms grown in this 
country. It had its counterpart in Europe in Patagonian, 
similar in shape but with a green color. Described by 
Burr in 1863 and mentioned by Harris in 1856, it was 
one of the kinds grown in earlier times for pies and 
later, after the introduction of those of better quality, 
relegated to the group grown only for feeding stock. 
The name can be traced in catalogs until the turn into 
the 20th century. 

The variety is practically identical to that of Sand- 
wich Island except in color of skin, the latter being 
profusely marked with a coarsely interlaced green color 
pattern which is emphasized particularly in the longi- 
tudinal stripes. 

Plant trailing; vines coarse, very vigorous, 20-25 feet. Fruit 
large, 18-20 x 8-10 inches: weight 18-25 pounds. Shape oblong, 
depressed at base and apex; ribs many, broad, very prominent. 



furrows deep and moderately wide, most irregular at the base; 
fruit stalk large, slightly curved, deeply furrowed, hard and woody. 
Shell soft; skin creamy-white. Flesh thick, coarse texture, soft, 
fair flavor; pale yellow. Seed long and narrow, yellowish white. 

Dauphine Early Bush. Refs. 61, 97. Syns. Early 
Dauphine, New Bush. 
An illustration of this variety is shown in the 
catalog of James J. H. Gregory & Son for 1906. While 
this may have been quite similar to Geneva Bush the 
description given shows the fruit to be larger and oblong 
rather than oblate. The possible use of this variety 
was in the home garden where a few hills could have 
been grown on a small area. 

Delicata. Refs. 17, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 41, 46, 47, 61, 
64, 73, 87, 95, 120, 121, 129, 130. Syns. Bohe- 
mian, Sweet Potato, Ward's Individual. 

Delicata, probably named for the delicate coloring 
of the fruits or for the richness of flavor, was introduced 
in 1894 as the earliest of the vine squash. Peter Hender- 
son 85 Co., New York, featured it for several years 
after its first introduction, but its popularity waned 
with the decline in use of this entire group. 

Eighty days were required for this variety to attain 
maturity at Geneva. This was about 6 days earlier 
than Table Queen and Fordhook and 10 days earlier 
than Black Michigan. The vines are less vigorous than 
those of Table Queen, and have smaller leaves which 
are considerably less deeply lobed and more distinctly 
silvery green in color. The flowers are slightly smaller 
and have distinctly smaller and more slender sepals on 
the pistillate inflorescences. The fruits are similar in 
shape to those of Black Michigan but are shorter, 
slightly more plump, and distinctly different in color. 

Plant trailing: vines moderately slender, medium vigor, 
8-10 feet; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons very 
short and narrow, l';x 1}^ inches; nearly round; apex rounded; 
veining prominent; color moderately light green. Leaves small, 
7x8 inches, shallowly 5-lobed, sinus acute; margin denticulate; 
surface smooth to somewhat blistered; color silvery green; petiole 
short and slender, 10-12 inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately 
small, 4 1 -_> inches across; orange; ovary nearly cylindrical, slightly 
constricted at the medial, slightly ridged and channeled; sepals very 
short and slender, '4 inch; — staminate, medium large, 5 inches 
across; sepals moderately short and moderately slender, 3 4 inch. 
Pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit very small, 8-10 x 3 ! 2-4 inches; weight 2-3 pounds. 
Shape cylindrical, ribbed narrowly; furrows broad and shallow: 
surface slightly wrinkled. Blossom scar with button \-i-]/2 inch 
long. Skin color light cream (cartridge buffi streaked and blotched 
with green dark cress green) along the furrows; during storage the 
green pattern is replaced with orange lochraceous orange 1 although 
the ground color cartridge buff) remains practically the same. 
Fruit stalk short, 1-2 inches, slender, usually straight, slightly 
ridged, slightly expanded at attachment and very easily detached. 
Shell moderately hard and medium thick, ) -. inch. Flesh moder- 
ately thin, 3 4 -l inch; texture very fine, tender, crisp, moderately 
dry: sweet, good flavor; quality good; color deep orange yellow 
(capucine yellow to orange buff). Seed cavity moderately small, 
conforms to fruit shape: placental tissue moderately abundant, 
rather moist, tender, easily removed. 

Seed small: short, broad and moderately flat; 1.24 x .86 x .25 
cm. 30C per oz. I; face smooth, often slightly curled or twisted, dull 
brownish yellow light buff) : margin wedge-like. 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



37 



Der Wing. Refs. 16, 25, 26, 27, 47, 64, 95, 115, 118, 130. 

This and Red China are the only squash varieties 
definitely ascribed to Chinese origin. W. Atlee Burpee 
& Co., Philadelphia, received seed of this along with 
other plant material from a native Chinese collector 
acting for them. It is distinct and was considered of 
good quality, but its small size and queer looks proved 
too great a handicap. 

The fruits are most like Brazilian Sugar in shape, 
differing from that variety in being smaller and having 
white skin. 

Plant trailing, medium vigor. 

Fruit very small; 5-6 x 2 J 2-3 inches; shape oval, somewhat 
pointed at apex; surface profusely warted; skin color white. Shell 
thick, very hard and woody. Flesh moderately thick, very sweet 
when cooked, very light yellow, often with a greenish tinge. 

Dunkard. Refs. 14, 130. Syn. Dunkard Winter. 

This variety originated with the Dunkards in Bucks 
County, Pennsylvania. Seeds were offered for sale in 
1892 by Johnson & Stokes of Philadelphia, and Frank 
Ford 8s Son of Ravenna, Ohio. The outstanding char- 
acteristic stressed in early descriptions was their great 
keeping qualities, specimens having remained in perfect 
condition for two years. The fruit, oblong in shape, 
frequently reached a weight of from twenty to twenty- 
five pounds. The outside skin color was a deep orange 
lightly striped. A good illustration can be found in the 
1896 catalog of W. Atlee Burpee & Co., which concern 
offered the variety until 1912. 

Earliest Prolific. Ref. 130. Syns. Extra Early Pro- 
lific, Prolific Early White Bush, Wood's Prolific. 

This early strain of the green tinted scalloped 
summer squash has been offered since 1899 by T. W. 
Woods & Sons, Richmond, Virginia. The fruits are 
borne in great profusion and when continuously har- 
vested will produce fruits throughout the season. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 50 
days, 4 days earlier than Long Island White Bush and 
6 days earlier than White Bush Scallop. The plants are 
not as vigorous as those of White Bush Scallop, although 
somewhat more inclined to produce semi-runners. 
The leaves are considerably smaller and less blistered, 
and the flowers are slightly smaller, particularly the 
staminate ones. The fruits are smaller, decidedly less 
scalloped, and more uniformly and heavily tinted 
with green. 

Plant bush: central stem moderately coarse, vigorous, branches 
very few, basal. Cotyledons short and moderately narrow, 1 3 4 x 
1 ] 4 inches; nearly round; apex rounded; veining prominent; color 
moderately light grayish green. Leaves small, 9 x 11 inches, 
shallowly 5-lobed; lobes broad, pointed; sinus shallow, acute and 
very narrow; margin incised near the base, otherwise serrate; 
surface smooth; color medium green: petiole moderately long and 
medium heavy, 16—18 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium large, 
5'_> inches across, pale orange; ovary disk-like, thick; sepals very 
short and slender, J 4 inch; — staminate, medium large, 5'_> inches 
across; sepals medium long and moderately heavy, 1 inch; pedicle 
short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 2-2}£ x 3-3 3 4 inches: shape bowl- 
like, flattened at the base, slightly and often obscurely scalloped; 
surface occasionally very sparsely warted; skin color pale green 



' (glass green). Mature fruit very small, 3 1 T -3 1 j x 5-5 ' ■< inches; 
weight 1-1 ' ■_> pounds. Shape much the same as when edible, 
warts more prominent; blossom scar small, smooth, slightly elevated. 
Skin color pale greenish white (pale chalcedony yellow) occasionally 
slightly tinted with pale yellow istraw yellow!. Fruit stalk short 
and slender, 1 inch, usually curved, shallowly furrowed, more or 
less conforming with the creases between the scallops, somewhat 
expanded at attachment. Shell very hard and brittle, medium 
thick, ' s inch, pale green I pale yellow green). Flesh medium thick 
at the apex 1 4"'_' inch; texture medium fine, structure appears 
irregularly fibrous; color white. Seed cavity large, nearest to apex; 
placental tissue abundant, prominent central core, moist, stringy, 
very difficult to remove. 

Seed small; short, moderately broad and flat, 1.34 x .95 x .17 
cm. (408 per oz.); face smooth, dull white (light buff); margin 
wedge-like. 

English Vegetable Marrow. Refs. 14, 19, 21, 24, 26, 

27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 42, 50, 64, 67, 73, 74, 75, 

76, 86, 92, 93, 98, 101, 117, 130, 136, 137. Syns. 

English Marrow, London Vegetable Marrow, Long 

Cream, Long White Bush Vegetable Marrow, 

Peerless Vegetable Marrow, Vegetable Cream 

Marrow, White Vegetable Marrow. 

Listed occasionally in American catalogs since 1824 

(Thorburn), this is often referred to as the standard 

English squash. The type represents one of the earliest 

forms of marrow squash grown, but has never been 

exceedingly popular in this country. In the Gardeners 

Chronicle of 1849 we find evidence that it had not 

always been common in English gardens for the writer 

referred to it as follows: " getting to be quite popular 

with working class of people in England as a food, also 

a stock food, especially hogs, and along with scarlet 

runners and gourds for covering arbours." 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 55 
days, 7 days earlier than Long White Trailing, in season 
with Italian Vegetable Marrow and 2 days later than 
Zucchini. The plants are much less vigorous than those 
of Long White Trailing, have slightly larger leaves which 
are less deeply cut and less blotched with gray. The 
mature edible fruits are much smaller, more regular and 
less ridged at the base, and are much the same in color 
except at maturity when the fruits of English Vegetable 
Marrow are brighter yellow. 

Plant bush; occasionally semi-bush; central stem coarse, 
vigorous; branches many, basal; spread 3-4 feet. Cotyledons 
moderately short and moderately narrow, 2 3 * x 1% inches; long 
oval; apex tapered; color moderately dark green. Leaves moder- 
ately small, 11 x 14 inches, broadly 5-cleft; sinus moderately 
narrow and rounded at the base; margin incised near the base, 
otherwise dentate, slightly frilled. Surface moderately smooth; 
color dark dull green, occasionally marked with few large grayish 
blotches at the intersections of veins and veinlets; petiole moder- 
ately long and slender, 15-18 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium 
large, 5 inches across, orange; ovary cylindrical; sepals very short 
and slender, ' 4 inch; — staminate, medium large, 5 inches across; 
sepals medium long and heavy, 1 inch; pedicle medium long, 8-9 
inches. 

Fruit mature edible, 10-1 2 inches long, 3-3 ' j inches in diameter 
at the apex and 2 3 4 -3 inches at the base. Shape nearly cylindrical, 
slightly enlarged at the apex; ribbed widely at the base; furrows 
moderately shallow; surface smooth. Skin color pale greenish 
white (sea foam green) over the entire surface. Mature fruit 
small, 14-16 x 5-5 1 ■_> inches at the apex, 3 ] 4 -3 3 4 at the base; weight 
5 ? 2-6 pounds. Shape much the same when mature edible. Skin 



38 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



color dull yellow (apricot yellow) over the entire surface. Fruit 
stalk very short and thick, J ^-2 inches, tapering, deeply furrowed, 
and expanded at the base. Shell thin, hard and brittle; cream color. 
Flesh moderately thin, 7 S inch, considerably thicker at base; texture 
moderately coarse, granular, rather firm and crisp; creamy yellow 
(Naples yellow) in color. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium broad and 
moderately fiat, 1.5 x .8 x .28 cm. (232 per oz.); face smooth, dull 
white (cartridge buff); margin wedge-like. 

Epicure. Refs. 75, 76. 

This is one of the English Marrows which is grown 
to a limited extent in this country. It was first offered 
by James Carter & Co., London, England, and is quite 
unlike other marrows cultivated for our markets. In 
many respects this English variety is very much like 
Winter Luxury. The leaves are slightly larger with 
the margin more frilled, while the fruits are somewhat 
less netted and thinner fleshed. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet. 

Fruit small; 5-6 x 8-9 inches; weight 5-8 pounds. Shape 
oblate, distinctly flattened and depressed at base and apex; ribbed 
widely, furrows obscure, very shallow at base; surface moderately 
netted with a cork-like skin eruption, some fruits nearly smooth; skin 
color bright orange (cadmium orange to zinc orange i. Fruit stalk 
ribbed, hard and woody. Shell moderately hard, flesh moderately 
thin, 3 4 -l inch, medium fine texture, rather moist, slightly sweet, 
color bright yellow i buff yellow ) ; quality fair. 

Fair's Benning White Bush. Ref. 63. Syns. Ben- 

ning Bush, Early Cluster, Farr's White Bush, 

Green Tinted White Bush. 

This is one of the most beautiful strains of the 

whole group of Patty Pans. We find it listed in 1914 

by F. W. Bolgiano 8b Co. of Washington, D. C, and 

in 1918 by Alexander Forbes & Co. of Newark, New 

Jersey. The strain was developed by Charles N. Farr 

and selected for the uniform scallops and the greenish 

cream coloring in the younger stages of the fruit. 

Flat Green. Syn. Green Gem Flat. 

Available catalogs show this to have been listed in 
the 1913 catalog of James J. H. Gregory Seed Co., and 
in 1916 by the D. Landreth Seed Co., as "an always 
green Patty Pan squash, same shape and size as the 
Early White Bush." This strain was apparently short 
lived, for it was not listed after 1918. The fruit was a 
dark olive green, remaining so to maturity. 

Fordhook. Refs. 25, 26, 30, 31, 33, 37, 38, 41, 45, 46, 

47, 59, 62, 64, 73, 91, 113, 115, 117, 118, 120, 
129, 130. Syns. Early Fordhook, Fordhook Mar- 
row, Fordhook Oblong, Oblong Shaped Fordhook. 
This small individual squash, similar in type to 
Black Michigan and Illinois Beauty, was introduced by 
W. Atlee Burpee of Philadelphia in 1890 and given the 
name of their trial grounds at Doylestown. The plants 
of the original Fordhook were of the running type. In 
1901, eleven years after the first introduction, Fordhook 
Bush or Fordhook White Bush was offered. This came 
from Chauncey P. Coy of Nebraska as a sport and was 
similar in habit to this group of squash in that short 



runners appeared only after the early set fruits had nearly 
reached full size. 

First edible fruits were ready at Geneva in 56 days. 
Mature fruits suitable for baking produced in 85 days, 
5 days later than Delicata and about in season with 
Table Queen. The vines are somewhat less vigorous 
than those of Table Queen with leaves smaller, less 
deeply cut and much less blistered and crumpled. The 
pistillate flowers have decidedly shorter sepals and have 
pyriform instead of turbinate -shaped ovaries. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender and medium vigorous, 
8-10 feet; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons very 
short and narrow, l"'s x l's inches; short oval; apex rounded; 
veining prominent; color dark grayish green. Leaves small, 9 x 10 
inches, very broadly 5-lobed; sinus very narrow, acute at the 
base, few sub-sinuses occasionally present on terminal lobe; margin 
serrate near the base, otherwise dentate; surface smooth, occasion- 
ally blistered; color dark green. Flower — pistillate, medium large, 
5 inches across, orange; ovary somewhat pyriform, ridged; sepals 
short and slender, ' •_> inch: — staminate, medium large, 5'j inches 
across; sepals medium long and moderately heavy, l's inches; 
pedicle short and very slender, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit very small, 8-10 x 3 ' £-4 inches at the apex, 2 ] £-3 inches 
at the base; weight 1 J £—2 pounds. Shape long pyriform, slightly 
constricted near the base; ribbed widely; furrows moderately deep; 
surface smooth; blossom scar with button, ] i inch. Skin color 
deep cream (cream color) somewhat irregularly and obscurely 
mottled with dull yellow (apricot yellow). Fruit stalk moderately 
short and slender, 2-3 inches, curved, ridged and furrowed, woody 
and tough, decidedly expanded at attachment. Shell moderately 
soft and thin, fg inch, somewhat thicker at the base. Flesh thin, 
, i inch, variable; texture moderately fine, firm, rather juicy, 
fibrous; insipid, quality poor; color very pale yellow (ivory yellow i. 
Seed cavity large, conforms to fruit shape; placental tissue moder- 
ately little, moist, rather tender, easily removed. 

Seed small; short, broad and moderately flat, 1.26 x .80 x .24 
cm. (304 per oz.) ; face smooth, dull yellowish brown ipale ochraceous 
salmon); margin wedge-like. 

Fort Berthold. Refs. 33, 41, 73, 129. 

Introduced in 1920 by Oscar H. Will 8e Co. of 
Bismarck, North Dakota, this small round pumpkin has 
been somewhat successful because of unusual hardiness 
and earliness. The original plants came from a collection 
of squash seed secured by Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore from 
the Indians of the Fort Berthold Reservation. 

This variety matured at Geneva in 110 days. 10 
days later than Small Sugar and 5 days later than 
Winter Luxury. The plants are more vigorous than 
those of Small Sugar, and have distinctly darker green 
vines and leaves which are considerably less cut and 
more blistered. The fruits are slightly larger than those 
of Small Sugar, similar in shape but more deeply and 
profusely furrowed and lighter orange in color. 

Plant trailing: vines medium slender, moderately vigorous, 
12-14 feet; very dark green at the base: branches medium in number, 
basal. Cotyledons moderately short and narrow, 2 1 v x l 1 g inches; 
long oval, apex nearly rounded; color moderately light green. 
Leaves moderately small, 11 x 13 inches; broadly but rather shal- 
lowly five-lobed, terminal lobe distinctly long tapered: sinuses 
narrow and rounded at the base; margin incised near the base, 
otherwise serrated; surface moderately blistered: color dark green; 
petiole medium long and heavy, 12-15 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
large, 7 inches across, orange: ovary globular: sepals short and 
slender, ' _> inch: — staminate, moderately large, 6'^ inches across; 
sepals medium long and moderately heavy, 1 ' s inches: pedicle 
moderately short, 7-8 inches. 




(Three-fourths natural size) 



FORDHOOK (upper) 



PERFECT GEM 




(One-half natural size* 



GOLDEN OBLONG 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



39 



Fruit small, 6-7 x 9-10 inches; weight 7-9 pounds. Shape 
nearly globular, depressed at both base and apex; ribbed narrowly; 
furrows numerous and moderately shallow; surface smooth; blossom 
scar depressed, ' _•-'.! inch in diameter. Skin color orange lochra- 
ceous orange to deep chrome); often the color is in the form of a 
very fine lace-like color pattern over the entire surface, within the 
mesh of which are minute specks of yellowish orange yellow ochre . 
Fruit stalk moderately short, 2 3 inches, curved, ridged, woody and 
tough, expanded at the attachment. Shell medium hard and 
medium thick, '< inch, dull orange (orange buffi in color. Flesh 
medium thick, 1-1 '4 inches; texture rather coarse, fibrous, juicy, 
soft; insipid, quality poor; color pale yellow (,pale orange yellow). 
Seed cavity moderately large; placental tissue medium in amount, 
chunky, stringy, difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately small, moderately short, medium broad and 
moderately flat, 1.6 x .86 x .28 cm. 200 per oz. I, often slightly twisted 
at the base; face smooth, dull white 1 cartridge buff ; margin wedge- 
like. 

Geneva Bush. Refs. 50, 101. Syns. Autumn Bush, 
Everbearing, Philadelphia. 

This bush pumpkin described by Goff in 1887 and 
also by Vilmorin has never been used commercially in 
this country. It probably had rather limited use and 
was offered from time to time as a novelty. In 1935 a 
" new " bush pumpkin was offered by Vaughan Seed 
Store and by Henry A. Dreer of Philadelphia. The 
growth habit of the plant is a bush similar to the scallops, 
crooknecks and some vegetable marrows and is of interest 
because of its possible adaptation for use in the small 
garden where space prevents the use of the running sorts. 

The fruits of this variety are similar in shape to 
Mediterranean squash and Epicure summer squash. 
However color characteristics and habit of plant growth 
serve to distinguish these sorts. 

Plant bush: central stem dark green, medium heavy, medium 
vigor, spread 4-5 feet: leaves medium large, 10 x 11 inches, broadly 
5-lobed: sinuses narrow, rounded at the base; rather light green: 
margin dentate; petiole long and moderately slender, 14-16 inches, 
often curved, pale green. 

Fruit very small; 4-^ 1 2 x 8-8*2 inches; distinctly oblate, 
sometimes decidedly flattened, depressed at base and apex; ribs 
numerous, very prominent at base, narrow; surface smooth. Skin 
color deep green when immature, pale orange when mature. Flesh 
thin, pale yellow, used in immature stage as a marrow. 

Giant Summer Crookneek. Refs. 14, 15, 24, 26, 

32, 33, 41, 45, 59, 60, 61, 64, 73, 81, 88, 89, 94, 
117, 129, 130. Syns. Arlington Summer Crook- 
neck, Early Giant Summer Crookneek, Early 
Mammoth Summer Crookneek, Genesee Giant 
Crookneek, Large Summer Warted Crookneek, 
Mammoth Crookneek, Mammoth Summer Crook- 
neck, Strickler Giant Summer Crookneek, Strick- 
ler Golden Summer Crookneek. 
The presence of a small and a large fruited strain 
of Crooknecks was a matter of record at the time Burr 
WTOte his " Field and Garden Vegetables." The Large 
Summer Warted Crookneek often produced plants that 
were semi-runners for in addition to recommending 
planting the hills at least 6 feet apart seedsmen occasion- 
ally pointed out the difficulty in selecting out a strain 
without runners. There were several local names for 
this large Crookneek, the most important being " Strick- 
ler " and that known in New England as Arlington 



Summer Crookneek. Minor improvements of earliness, 
productiveness and size and shape of fruits often led 
to the introduction of " new strains " of this widely 
grown squash. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 60 
days, 3 days earlier than Giant Summer Straightneck 
and 5 days later than Summer Crookneek. The plants 
are slightly more vigorous than those of Giant Summer 
Straightneck, have larger and distinctly more blistered 
leaves with straighter and much darker petioles and 
have larger pistillate flowers with distinctly crooked 
ovaries instead of nearly straight ones. The fruits are 
much the same except in the degree of crook near 
the base. 

Plant bush; central stem coarse, very heavy, dark green, 
vigorous; branches few, basal. Cotyledons short and moderately 
narrow, l :i 4 x lj^ inches; oval; apex tapered; veining moderately 
prominent; color grayish green. Leaves moderately large, 12 x 15 
inches; very broadly five-lobed; sinus shallow, narrow and acute 
margin incised near the base, otherwise dentate, slightly frilled 
surface rough, distinctly blistered and occasionally crumpled 
color dark, glossy green; petiole moderately long and heavy, 15-18 
inches, moderately dark green in color. Flower — pistillate, 
moderately small, 4^ inches across, orange; ovary club-like, con- 
stricted and curved pear the base; sepals short and slender, > 2 inch; 
— staminate, medium large, 5 inches across; sepals medium long and 
heavy, 1 inch; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 12-14 inches long, 3 ;i 4~4 inches in 
diameter at the apex and l 3 4-2 ] 4 inches at the base; shape club- 
like, distinctly curved and moderately constricted near the base, 
gradually enlarged at the apex; ribbed very narrowly; furrows 
shallow; surface rather deeply and profusely warted: skin color 
deep yellow cadmium yellow), irregularly and rather obscurely 
mottled and streaked with pale yellow apricot yellow'. Interior 
greenish white flesh. Mature fruit moderately small, 16-18 inches 
long, 5-6 inches in diameter at the apex and 2 ' >-3 inches at the 
base, weight 3 ' £-4 pounds. Shape much the same as mature 
edible stage; blossom scar with button *2 inch in diameter, slightly 
extended. Skin color orange 1 orange); fruit stalk short and moder- 
ately slender, 1 ' £—2 inches, slightly curved, moderately ridged, 
woody and tough. Shell thick to very thick, J^— Jij inch; hard and 
woody, orange 1 deep chrome ) in color. Flesh thin at the apex and 
medial, basal portion solid; texture moderately fine, slightly granu- 
lar, soft, rather moist, cream color 1 cream colorj. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, moderately broad 
and flat, 1.42 x .86 x .20 cm. (316 per oz.); face smooth, dull yellow- 
ish white 1 light buff); margin wedge-like. 

Giant Summer Straijihtneck. Refs. 27, 64, 130. 
Syns. Early Giant Summer Straightneck, Giant 
Straightneck, Giant Yellow Summer Straightneck, 
Long Golden Straightneck, Straightneck, Straight- 
neck Summer. 
This is a selection from the Giant Crookneek. It 
was offered in 1896 by Vaughan, Ford and others but 
apparently most growers preferred to grow the real 
" goose neck " shaped fruits. The last decade has seen 
several strains offered which produce 90 per cent or 
more straight fruits and they are proving popular in 
many market centers. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 65 
days, 5 days later than Giant Summer Crookneek and 
10 days later than Summer Crookneek. The plants are 
slightly less vigorous than those of Giant Summer Crook- 
neck, have somewhat smaller, less blistered and crumpled 
leaves with distinctly more crooked and lighter green 



40 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



petioles. The pistillate flowers are smaller and have 
much straighter ovaries. The fruits are much the same, 
although this variety produces much straighter and more 
regular ones. 

Plant bush: central stem coarse, heavy, vigorous, nearly black; 
branches few, basal and medial. Cotyledons moderately short and 
moderately broad, 2 : 4 x 1 ] _> inches; oval; apex tapered; veining 
prominent; medium light grayish green. Leaves moderately small, 
10 x 14 inches, five-lobed, moderately deep; sinus narrow and acute; 
margin incised near the base, otherwise dentate, slightly frilled; 
surface slightly crumpled, rough; color moderately glossy dark green; 
petiole moderately long and heavy, 16-18 inches, very prominent, 
sprawling and distinctly curved, pale green in color. Flower 
— pistillate, very abundant, moderately large, 6 inches across, 
orange; ovary club-like, slightly curved near the base; sepals short 
and slender, 5 , inch; — staminate many, medium large, 5'j inches 
across; sepals medium long and heavy, 1 inch; pedicle short, 5-6 
inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 12-15 inches long, 3}£~4 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 2-2 ' £ inches at the base; shape club-like, 
apex gradually enlarged, ribbed very narrowly; furrows rather shal- 
low; surface wrinkled, warted and often somewhat corrugated. 
Skin color deep yellow (apricot to light cadmium) obscurely mottled 
with pale yellow pinard yellow i . Interior greenish white. Mature 
fruit small, 15-18 inches long, 5-5 * 2 inches in diameter at the 
apex and 3 1 £-4 inches at the base; weight 4—5 pounds; shape much 
the same when mature edible, surface deeply and prominently 
warted and corrugated. Skin color dull orange (deep chrome) 
with the warts often pale orange (orange buff). Fruit stalk short 
and slender, 1-1 J _> inches, very slightly curved, rather deeply 
furrowed, woody, tough. Shell thick, ' ,- - inch; variable, hard, 
brittle, pale orange (pale orange yellow) with a very thin, more 
intense orange (.orange buff) layer next to the flesh. Flesh thin at 
medial and apex, ) - 1 inch, nearly solid at base; texture coarse, 
granular and soft, pale yellow (cream colon. 

Seed small; short, broad and moderately flat, 1.37 x .87 x .23 
cm. (284 per oz.); face smooth, dull white (cartridge buff); margin 
wedge-like. 

Gibson. Refs. 59, 64, 130. 

This was listed by James J. H. Gregory & Son, 
Marblehead, Massachusetts, in 1893, as a hybrid between 
Small Sugar and a variety from California. From illus- 
trations the fruit appeared much like Custard but the 
skin color was a deeper orange. 

Golden Custard. Refs. 14, 26, 27, 33, 41, 64, 73, 76, 
88, 89, 115, 116, 121, 129, 130. Syns. Extra 
Large Golden Bush Scallop, Extra Large Golden 
Custard, Golden Custard Yellow Bush, Mammoth 
Golden Bush, Mammoth Golden Custard, Mam- 
moth Yellow Bush Scallop, Mammoth Yellow 
Custard Marrow, Yellow Elector's Cap. 
Peter Henderson & Co. of New York, in 1889 
introduced this large fruited strain of Yellow Bush 
Scallop. It is the largest fruited of all the scallops and 
as such has a place in the group of varieties grown for 
early summer squash. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 53 
days, 7 days earlier than Yellow Bush Scallop, in season 
with Zucchini and 3 days later than Earliest Prolific. 
The plants are more vigorous than those of Yellow 
Bush Scallop, have much heavier and darker green stalks, 
have somewhat larger leaves which are lighter green 
in color, more crumpled and blistered, and have dis- 
tinctly heavier, more prominent, and lighter green 



petioles. The mature edible fruits are considerably 
broader, thinner and decidedly more irregularly scalloped. 

Plant bush; central stem very heavy and coarse, vigorous, 
spread 4-4j^ feet; color very dark green; branches usually absent. 
Cotyledons moderately short and medium broad, 2} fj x l 1 2 inches; 
oval; apex rounded; veining prominent; color grayish green. Leaves 
sparse, moderately large, 12 x 15 inches, broadly and deeply five- 
cleft, often nearly parted; sinuses narrow, deep, acute; terminal 
lobes have an occasional shallow sub-sinus; margin incised near 
the base, otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled; surface distinctly 
crumpled and blistered; color moderately light glossy green; petiole 
very heavy and moderately long, 16—18 inches, light green. Flower 
— pistillate, moderately large, 6 inches across, orange; ovary disk- 
like, very irregularly waved; sepals very short and very slender, 
' 4 inch; — staminate, moderately large, 6 ! 2 inches across; sepals 
moderately short and moderately slender, J 4 inch; pedicle short, 
6 inches. 

Fruit mature edible, 2—3 x 6—8 inches; shape disk-like, margin 
irregular, wavy to horizontal, deeply scalloped; surface smooth; 
skin color deep yellow (lemon chrome), mottled irregularly with 
pale yellow (citron yellow). Mature fruit very small, 3' £-4 x 10-12 
inches; weight 5-7 pounds; shape same as mature edible stage. 
Skin color predominantly deep yellow (cadmium yellow), irregularly 
mottled with (capucine yellow), usually conforming with the 
furrows between the scallops. Fruit stalk moderately short and 
slender, 2-3 inches, curved, ridged and shailowly furrowed, woody 
and tough. Shell hard and rather thin, yj inch. Flesh solid at 
the medial, thin at base and apex; texture coarse, fibrous, rather 
juicy, moderately tough cream color). 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, moderately broad 
and rather flat, 1.40 x .89 x .29 cm. (220 per oz.); face smooth, dull 
yellow 1 pale ochraceous salmon); margin wedge-like. 

Golden Heart. Ref. 47. 

The Vaughan Seed Store, Chicago, Illinois, in the 
1894 catalog shows a picture of this new introduction. 
It was originated by C. P. Coy of Waterloo, Nebraska, 
and was said to have come from a cross between Cocoanut 
and some unknown variety. The fruit was heart-shaped, 
golden yellow with dark green stripes along the furrows. 
Very early and prolific, it can be grouped with the 
small-fruited fall squash popular at that time. 

Golden Oblong. Refs. 14, 27, 33, 41, 64, 73, 90, 96, 
129, 130. Syns. Gold Oblong, Golden Long, 
Golden Long Pie, Long Yellow Field, New Golden 
Oblong, Oblong Yellow. 

Golden Oblong was introduced in 1889 by W. Atlee 
Burpee 85 Co., Philadelphia, as a companion variety to 
Small Sugar. From its appearance and high quality it 
must be closely related to this variety, although no 
record of this relationship is available. 

The variety attained maturity at Geneva in 120 
days, in season with Connecticut Field and 20 days 
later than Small Sugar. The vines are in most respects 
similar to those of Connecticut Field, but have pistillate 
flowers with ovaries which are decidedly more cylindrical. 
The fruits are similar in color but those of Golden 
Oblong are longer and have flesh which is drier and 
darker in color. 

Plant trailing; vines medium heavy, moderately vigorous, 
12-14 feet, dark green; branches medium number, basal. Coty- 
ledons moderately short and moderately narrow, 2 1 .] x l 1 t inches; 
nearly rectangular; apex moderately rounded; color medium 
green. Leaves medium large, 11 x 15 inches, moderately deep 
and broadly lobed; sinus rounded at the base, sub-sinuses shallow 
and present on all lobes; margin slightly incised at the base. 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



41 



otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled: surface moderately smooth, 
occasionally somewhat crumpled; color dark green, often marked 
with large gray blotches at the intersections of veins and vein- 
lets; peticle moderately short and slender, 12 14 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, large, 7 inches across, deep orange, ovary cylindrical, 
green, finely speckled with pale yellow; sepals short and slender, 
'j inch. — stsminate. medium large, 5 ' _>-o inches, pubescence dis- 
tinctly long; sepals moderately short and moderately heavy, :i ( inch; 
pedicle long, 10-12 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 14-16 x 6-7 inches; weight 8-9 pounds. 
Shape cylindrical, slightly depressed at the base and apex; ribbed 
moderately narrow; furrows very shallow and obscure; surface 
smooth, occasionally very slightly netted; blossom scar small, 
'_,-' _i inch in diameter, depressed. Skin color dark orange (ochra- 
ceous orange 1 in the form of a fine uniformly distributed lace-like 
pattern over the entire surface, specked with a pale orange anti- 
mony yellow under color which occurs within the mesh of the lace- 
like pattern: occasionally sparsely covered with minute corky specks 
or eruptions similar in nature to the netting of Winter Luxury; 
however, no intertwining occurs. Fruit stalk medium long, 3 \ _— \ 
inches, decidedly curved, ridged, woody and tough, very slightly 
expanded at attachment. Shell moderately thin, A~ H ' ncn an< i 
moderately hard. Flesh moderately thick, 1 1 4 -1 ' ■> inches, thickest 
at the base and medial: texture medium coarse, tender, slightly 
moist, slightly fibrous: rather insipid, quality fair; color pale orange 
to orange pale orange yellow to cadmium yellow 1 . Seed cavity 
large, conforms to fruit shape; placental tissue moderately abundant, 
moist, slightly fibrous, easily removed. 

Seed medium size: medium long and broad, medium plump, 
1.90 x 1.20 x .32 cm. 140 per oz. ; face smooth, dull white cartridge 
buff ; margin wedge-like. 

Green Bush Scalloped. Ref. 24. 

As described by Burr in 1863, the fruit of this 
bush squash was similar in size and form to the Yellow 
and the White Bush Scallop. The skin color of the 
fruit was given as bottle green, marbled or clouded 
with shades of lighter green. This probably differed 
little from the strain introduced later as Flat Green 
by the D. Landreth Co. 

Green Striped Bergen. Refs. 14, 19, 24, 34, 50, 78, 

101, 130, 136, 137. Syns. Bergen, Green Striped 

Bush, Marrow Striped Cluster, Striped Custard 

Marrow. 

This early bush pepo was described by Burr in 

1863 and is therefore one of the earliest of the type 

known today as individual fall squash. It was listed 

until the late eighties by the leading seedsmen. While 

the description below comes from notes taken at Geneva 

in 1885 other published records show the shape to be 

quite variable from bell-shaped to quite flat, the color, 

however, remaining dark green and white striped. 

Plant bush: central stem dark green, thick, about 2 feet long; 
branches moderately many, spread 4-5 feet, very vigorous. Leaves 
very large, five-lobed, rounded at the ends, pale green; petioles long 
and moderately slender. 

Fruit very small, 5-6 x 4-5 incnes: inversely bell-shaped; 
often ovate, depressed at the base; ribs numerous, most distinct at 
the base; skin color creamy white, spotted and blotched with pale 
and dark green; furrows very dark green. Fruit stalk slender, very 
dark green, curved, sparsely furrowed, spiny. 

Green Summer Crookneek. Refs. 14, 50, 74, 75, 
95, 115, 130. Syns. Long Green Crookneek, Long 
Green Summer Crookneek. 
This crookneek which was popular from 1885 to the 

late nineties is seldom cultivated today. Illustrations 



and descriptions are found in early catalogs particularly 
those of Johnson 8b Stokes for 1892 and D. Landreth 
Seed Co. for 1885. The Green Crookneek squashes 
were grown by gardeners in the Philadelphia section 
but seem to have been little known elsewhere. Although 
catalog listings occur as early as 1859 it was not described 
by Burr. 

This differed from regular Crookneek in color of 
skin, and possibly was a trifle larger. 

Plant trailing; vines very dark green at base, vigorous; leaves 
large, shallowly five-lobed, deep green; petioles pale green. 

Fruit small, 12-14 x 3-3 >_• inches, greatest diameter at the 
apex; club-shaped, more or less crooked near the base; surface warted 
and corrugated, skin color very dark green, often irregularly and 
narrowly striped with pale or yellowish green. Mature fruits have 
a shell hard and tough and flesh moderately dry, sweet, well flavored 
and pale yellow in color. 

Illinois Beauty. Refs. 77, 88, 117. 

This was a strikingly colored autumn variety cata- 
loged in 1890 by James J. H. Gregory fit Sons, Marble- 
head, Mass. These early fall squashes lost favor with 
the introduction of improved maximas and it has been 
only within recent years, subsequent to the introduction 
of Table Queen, that the type has again found a market. 

The variety is most like Delicata and Black Michigan 
in shape, although usually somewhat more tapered at 
the base. The distinct skin color pattern serves to 
separate it from others in the group. 

Plant semi-trailing, vigorous grower. Fruit very small, 
8-10 x 3-4 inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, slightly tapering at 
the base; ribs moderately broad, prominent; furrows moderately 
deep; surface moderately smooth. Skin color at the ends is dark 
green and in the center is a broad, definite band of orange yellow. 
Flesh thick, firm, fine texture, dry, sweet, yellow, quality good. 
Seed cavity very small. 

Italian Bapid Bush 

D. V. Burrell Seed Growers Co., Rocky Ford, 
Colorado, introduced this new strain in 1933. It is a 
prolific strain of Cocozelle producing fruits which are 
more slender, have more definite and regular color 
stripes of greater contrasting green shades, and which 
in the mature stage has more yellow to replace the 
green. 

Italian Vegetable Marrow. Refs. 14, 24, 26, 27, 33, 

45, 48, 50, 64, 86, 101, 130, 137. Syns. Asparagus 

Squash, " Cocozelle," Egg Plant Squash, Italian 

Green Striped. 

This name, which in recent years has come to be 

associated with a definite group of varieites, is also one 

of the oldest specific names. Burr in 1863 listed and 

described it, but apparently little notice was taken of 

the variety until sometime in the eighties. It was 

grown at the Geneva Station as Italian Green Striped, 

and this name with an illustration similar to that which 

appeared in Vilmorin was used in the 1890 catalog of 

James J. H. Gregory of Marblehead, Massachusetts. 

Thorburn published this illustration in 1895 but the 

variety was named as Italian Vegetable Marrow. 

The name Cocozelle appeared in the 1892 catalog 
of Frank Ford 8s Son, Ravenna, Ohio, and also in that 



42 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



of W. Atlee Burpee for 1893. The names Cocozelle 
and Italian Vegetable Marrow were from that time on 
used rather interchangeably. In the catalogs of various 
Italian seed houses can be found many varieties which 
belong in this group. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 55 
days, 3 days earlier than Long Green Trailing, in season 
with English Vegetable Marrow and 2 days later than 
Zucchini. The plants are much more vigorous than 
those cf Cocozelle, have larger leaves less blotched with 
gray and have larger flowers. The fruits are similar 
in shape to those of Cocozelle but are larger and dis- 
tinctly more prominently ribbed at the base. 

Plant bush; central stem heavy, coarse, very vigorous, spread 
4—5 feet: branches many, basal. Cotyledons moderately short 
and moderately narrow, 2 1 ; x 1 . inches; oval; apex tapered; color 
dark green. Leaves medium large, 12x15 inches, rather narrowly 
five-lobed; sinus rather narrow and rounded at the base; sub-sinuses 
many; margin incised at the base, otherwise serrate, finely frilled; 
surface moderately smooth; color dark green, occasionally marked 
with large irregular gray blotches at intersections of veins and 
veinlets; petiole very long and moderately slender, 20-22 inches. 
Flower — pistillate, large, 7 inches across; orange; ovary cylindri- 
cal: sepals very short and slender, s , inch: — staminate, moderately 
small, 4 inches across; sepals moderately short and very thick, 
rich; pedicle short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 14-16 inches long, 3-3';> inches in 
diameter at the apex and 2 3 4 -3 inches at the base. Shape nearly 
cylindrical, slightly enlarged at the apex, often slightly curved, 
ribbed moderately wide and furrowed moderately deep at the base; 
surface smooth. Skin color predominantly dark green (dull green- 
ish black) in the form of a lace-like color pattern over the whole 
fruit, but concentrated in narrow, solid, dark green stripes which 
more or less conform with the ridges, often somewhat irregularly 
blotched with same color: ground color appearing within the mesh 
is yellowish green sea foam yellow to margarite yellow I ; those 
areas between the dark stripes are less concentrated and lighter 
green tcalla to cress green ' in color. Interior greenish white flesh. 
Mature fruit moderately small, 22-25 inches long, 3}£-4j^ inches 
in diameter at the apex and 2 3 4-3'2 inches at the base; weight 
6-6'_> pounds. Shape same as mature edible stage, ridges much 
more prominent; skin color dark dull green dull blackish green 
laced stripes 3 4-l inch broad, somewhat irregular in outline, alternat- 
ing with pale yellow (light cadmium laced stripes 3 >- ! _> inch wide; 
both stripes occasionally blotched with the contrasting color; ground 
color appearing within the mesh is yellowish cream cream color . 
Fruit stalk short and thick, 1'4-1 3 4 inches, straight, abruptly 
tapered, prominently ridged to conform with those of the fruit, 
expanded at attachment, hard, woody and tough. Shell moderately 
hard. Flesh medium thin, :i 4 -l inch, slightly thicker at the base; 
texture coarse, granular, soft; pale buff cream color . 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium broad and 
medium plump, 1.66 x .87 x .31 cm. 1 180 per oz. ; face smooth, dull 
white light buff); margin wedge-like. 

Long Green Trailing. Ref. 33. Syn. Green Vining 
Vegetable Marrow. 

This type of English marrow has been offered by 
Stumpp & Walter Co. of New York and Henry A. 
Dreer of Philadelphia for many years. Its principal 
use is as a summer squash, for when picked young, 
boiled and served as a melting side dish with cream 
sauce it is considered superior to our American summer 
squash. 

The edible fruits were first produced at Geneva in 
58 days, 4 days earlier than Long White Trailing and 
3 days later than Italian Vegetable Marrow. The vines 



are equally as vigorous as Long White Trailing, have 
slightly larger leaves not as deeply cut and less sparsely 
blotched with gray. The fruits are very much like 
those of Italian Vegetable Marrow in shape and color, 
but are distinctly thicker, heavier and more prominently 
ridged at the base. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately heavy, moderately vigorous, 

12-15 feet; branches few, basal. Cotyledons medium long and 
medium broad, 2 S x 1 ' 2 inches: long oval; apex rounded: color 
medium dark green. Leaves medium large, 12 x 14 inches, broadly 
five-cleft with each lobe having 2—1 shallow sub-sinuses; sinus 
narrow, slightly rounded at the base: margin slightly incised near 
the base, otherwise serrate, frilled; surface moderately smooth; 
color dark green occasionally sparsely blotched with gray: petiole 
long and moderately heavy, 18-20 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
moderately large, 6 1 > inches across, orange; ovary club-like, apex 
slightly enlarged: sepals very short and very slender, ] j inch; 
— staminate, medium large, 5'j inches across; sepals medium 
long and heavy, 1 inch; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 10-12 inches long, 4-5 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 3 ' j— I 1 _> inches at the base; shape nearly 
cylindrical slightly tapering towards the base; ribbed widely, very 
prominent at the base; surface smooth; skin color predominantly 
dark dull green dull greenish black 1 in the form of broad, irregular 
stripes, alternated with lace-like, narrower stripes of lighter green 

calla green , through the mesh of which shows the greenish yellow 
^sea foam yellow I ground color. Interior pale greenish white pale 
glass green . Mature fruit small, 15-16 inches long, 5-6 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 5-5 ' 2 inches at the base: weight 6-7 pounds. 
Shape nearly cylindrical; skin color much the same as when mature 
edible except that the lighter shades of gTeen are replaced by yellow 

antimony yellow . Fruit stalk moderately short and heavy, 2-3 
inches, deeply furrowed and much expanded at the base, hard 
and woody. Shell medium thick, J g inch, pale green glass green , 
woody and brittle. Flesh very coarse and granular, firm, pale 
orange ilight orange yellow). 

Seed medium large; medium long and broad and medium 
plump, 1.8 x 1.07 x .33 cm. 146 per oz.); face smooth, pale buff 

cartridge buff : margin wedge-like. 

Long Island White Bush. Refs. 17, 33, 41, 46, 60, 

61, 64, 73. 76, 129, 130. Syns. Improved Long 
Island White, Long Island Mammoth White. 

This was listed by Peter Henderson Co., New York, 
in 1892, and undoubtedly had been in use as a separate 
strain for many years. In early catalogs it was often 
confused with Mammoth White Bush Scallop but the 
strain today is known for its bowl -like fruit. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 54 
days, 2 days earlier than White Bush Scallop and 4 
days later than Earliest Prolific. The plants are less 
vigorous than those of White Bush Scallop and have 
smaller leaves which are much smoother. The flowers 
are smaller and ovaries are decidedly less scalloped. 
The mature edible fruits are much thicker than those 
of White Bush Scallop, decidedly smoother and less 
scalloped; also are larger than Earliest Prolific and 
decidedly lighter in color. 

Plant bush; central stem moderately slender, medium vigor, 
spread 3-3 'j feet; branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons 
moderately short and medium broad, 2'j x 1 ' ■> inches: oval; apex 
tapered: veining moderately prominent; color medium green. 
Leaves moderately small, 11 x 13 inches, rather broadly and deeply 
five-lobed: sinus medium broad and rounded at the base, sub- 
sinuses occasionally present on terminal lobe; margin denticulate, 
slightly incised near the base: surface occasionally somewhat 









(Two-thirds natural size) 



ITALIAN VEGETABLE MARROW 





a 



MANDAN 



(Three-fourths natural size) 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



43 



crumpled: color dark green; petiole medium long and moderately 
slender, 15 16 inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately small, 4'. ■ 
inches across, orange; ovary nearly globular, very nearly scallopless; 
sepals short and slender, ' ■_> inch; — staminate, medium large, 5 
inches across; sepals medium long and moderately slender, 1 ' i 
inches; pedicle medium long, 8 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 2 2 :; , x 4 l , 5 inches; shape bowl- 
like, very shallowly scalloped, often obscurely; ribbed widely; 
furrows very shallow: surface smooth. Skin color white. Interior 
nearly white. Mature fruits very small, 3,' -j-4 x 5' > 6 inches; 
weight 2-2 ' £ pounds. Shape much the same when mature edible, 
scalloping slightly more accentuated. Skin color creamy white 
ivory yellow) indistinctly mottled with very pale yellow (colonial 
buff\ often russetted on the base. Fruit stalk moderately short 
and slender, 2-2 ' _■ inches, usually curved, shallowly furrowed, 
expanded at attachment, hard and woody. Shell moderately hard 
and thin, yV inch, creamy white (ivory yellow) in color. Flesh 
1-1 1 4 inches, thickest at the scallop, apex very thin, ^ _• inch; texture 
medium fine, rather fibrous, soft, cream color (colonial buff). 

Seed moderately small: moderately short, moderately broad 
and rather flat, 1.5 x .9 x .28 cm. (212 per oz.); face smooth, very 
pale buff (light buff!; margin wedge-like. 

Long White Trailing. Refs. 33, 41, 49, 50, 73, 74, 
75, 76, 129. Syns. White Trailing, White Vining 
Vegetable Marrow. 

As a companion variety to Long Green Trailing 
the fruits of this variety, except in size, differ little from 
English Vegetable Marrow. It is carried by Henry A. 
Dreer of Philadelphia and Stumpp & Walter of New 
York City, but is seldom found on our markets. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 62 
days, 7 days later than English Vegetable Marrow and 
9 days later than Moore's Cream. The vines are equally 
as vigorous as Moore's Cream although much heavier 
and have leaves which are smoother and less inclined 
to be cone-like. The mature edible fruits are similar 
in color, decidedly larger and much more ridged at the 
base; at full maturity the fruits of Moore's Cream are 
much darker orange. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, moderately vigorous, 
12-15 feet; branches many, basal. Cotyledons medium long and 
moderately narrow, 2 ' _■ x 1 ] 4 inches, nearly rectangular; apex 
moderately rounded; color medium green. Leaves small, 10 x 12 
inches, flattened, broadly and deeply five-lobed: sinuses narrow and 
rounded at the base: margin incised near the base of the blade, 
otherwise serrate; surface smooth; color moderately dark green, 
moderately blotched with gray at the intersections of the veins and 
veinlets: petioles short and slender, 10-1 2 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
medium large, 5 ! 2 inches across, orange; ovary cylindrical; sepals 
very short and very slender, l s- ! 4 inch; — staminate, medium 
large 5'j-6 inches across; sepals medium long and very heavy, 
1 inch; pedicle moderately long, 9-10 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 16-20 inches long, 4'j-5 inches 
in diameter at the apex and 4^4' _> inches at the base; shape cylin- 
drical, occasionally somewhat constricted near the base; ribbed 
rather prominently at the base and medial, otherwise surface is 
smooth. Skin color pale green I glass green I obscure, lace-like 
pattern over the entire fruit through the mesh of which shows the 
greenish white (pale dull green yellow) ground color. Interior 
pale greenish white. Mature fruit moderately small, 18-22 inches 
long, 5 ' _.-6 inches in diameter at the apex and 4 ' £—5 inches at the 
base; weight 7-8 pounds; shape much the same as mature edible 
fruits; skin color buff (antimony yellow) over entire fruit. Fruit 
stalk moderately short and medium heavy, 2j£- 3 inches, deeply 
furrowed to conform with the ridges on the fruit, hard and woody. 
Shell medium thick, ' , inch, hard, woody, pale yellow (straw yellow). 
Flesh moderately thin, : ! 4- : s inch, coarse, granular, firm, buff 
(cream color). 



Seed medium large: medium long, moderately narrow and 
medium plump, 1.8 x .92 x .30 cm. (168 per oz. I; face smooth, pale 
buff (cartridge buff); margin wedge-like. 

Mammoth White Busb Scallop. Refs. 14, 26, 31, 
33, 41, 61, 64, 73, 88, 95, 121, 129, 130. Syns. 
Early Mammoth White Bush, Giant White Bush 
Scallop, Large Patty Pan. 

A. W. Livingston's Sons of Columbus, Ohio, in 
1891 offered seed of Mammoth White Bush Scallop. 
The new introduction proved popular and it has remained 
one of the most widely used strains of the scallop squash. 
The plants of this variety are much more vigorous 
than those of Early White Bush Scallop, but otherwise 
are much alike. The fruits are similar in type but are 
distinctly larger and profusely covered with wart-like 
protuberances. 

Mandan. Refs. 33, 73. Syns. Early Mandan, Rapid 
Mandan. 

The name comes from the Mandan Indians who 
had grown this squash for many generations before it 
was introduced to the trade in the 1912 catalog of Oscar 
H. Will & Co., Bismarck, North Dakota. In color this is 
much like the Green Striped Bergen grown nearly a 
century ago but the shape is decidedly more oblate. The 
plant is of the bush type until after the first fruits are 
well grown; runners then appear and produce a second 
set of fruits. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 56 
days, 4 days earlier than Giant Summer Crookneck, in 
season with Fordhook and 6 days later than Earliest 
Prolific. The vines are much less vigorous than those 
of Fordhook, have slightly larger and distinctly lighter 
green leaves and have flowers with somewhat longer 
and distinctly broader sepals. The mature edible fruits 
are similar in shape to Long Island White Bush, but 
have a much rougher surface and a very individualistic 
color pattern. 

Plant trailing; vines very dark green, slender, very weak, 4—5 
feet; branches few, basal. Cotyledons moderately short and 
moderately narrow, 2 x ljg inch, oval; apex tapered; veining yellow- 
ish green, rather prominent; color moderately light green. Leaves 
small, 10 x 12 inches, shallowly lobed; sinus acute, moderately 
shallow; margin dentate, slightly frilled: surface smooth; color 
distinctly light green; petiole moderately short and slender, 12-14 
inches, moderately light green. Flower — pistillate, medium large, 
5^ inches across, orange; ovary short turbinate, slightly ridged and 
wrinkled; sepals moderately short and somewhat leaf-like, 7 * inch; 
— staminate, medium large, 5'_> inches across; sepals medium long 
and thick, 1 inch; pedicle short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 3-3 J o x 4-5 inches; shape nearly 
oblate, flattened at base and apex, somewhat depressed at the base; 
ribbed widely: furrows medium deep; surface uneven and moderately 
warted, wrinkled. Skin color nearly white, striped and mottled 
irregularly with green (Varley's green). Interior pale green (glass 
green), flavor excellent. Mature fruit very small, 4-4 '2 x 7-7 ' '< 
inches; weight 3-4 pounds; shape much the same as mature edible; 
ridges more prominent and surface irregularities more accentuated. 
Skin color greenish white (sea foam yellow) stripes l'^-l'i inches 
broad at the medial, sparsely blotched with small, irregularly laced, 
green ilijht bice green) areas. Alternating stripes conform with 
the ridges, ■.-'_. inch broad, somewhat irregular, dark green idarl- 
dull yellow green 1 in color and through the mesh of lacing shows the 
pale greenish white (sea foam yellowi of the contrasting stripe. 



44 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Fruit stalk short and slender, 1-2 inches, curved, ridged, woody 
and tough, easily detached. Shell medium thick, ' g inch, hard, 
woody and brittle, pale greenish yellow ipale dull green yellow), 
under which a thin bright green i apple green) layer is present. 
Flesh moderately thin, 3 g-1 inch at the medial and base, much 
thinner at apex, texture rather coarse, fibrous, moderately soft and 
wet; insipid: nearly white in color. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, broad and flat, 
1.47 x .94 x .20 cm. (260 per oz.); face smooth dull buff yellow (pale 
ochraceous salmon) ; margin rounded. 

Moore's Cream. Refs. 11, 74, 75, 130. Syn. Moore's 
Vegetable Cream. 

Moore's Cream is one of the oldest of the English 
Marrows. It was listed by Hovey & Co. of Boston in 
1868, and has been carried by many of the American 
seedsmen as the single representative of this group of 
squash. It was originally introduced by Thomas Moore, 
who was at the time secretary of the Royal Horticultural 
Society. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 53 
days, 9 days earlier than Long White Trailing, in season 
with Zucchini and a day later than Boston Greek. The 
vines are very much like those of Long White Trailing, 
with the leaves slightly smaller and less deeply cut. 
The mature edible fruits are much smaller, more regular, 
and when mature have a skin color decidedly darker 
orange in color. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, moderately vigorous, 12-15 feet, 
moderately light green; branches many, basal and medial. Coty- 
ledons moderately short and moderately narrow, somewhat rectangu- 
lar; apex rounded; veining moderately prominent; color medium 
green. Leaves small, 9 x 12 inches, broadly and rather deeply 
5-lobed; sinus broad, obtuse; margin incised near the base, otherwise 
serrate, moderately frilled; color medium green, occasionally blotched 
with gray at vein intersections; petiole short, 10-12 inches; flower — 
pistillate, medium large, 5 '2-6 inches across, orange; ovary plump, 
cylindrical: sepals very short and very slender, j 3 6 inch; — stami- 
nate, medium large, 5-5 '2 inches across; sepals moderately short 
and thick, "s inch; pedicle medium long, 8-9 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 8-9 x 4— 4*2 inches; shape short 
cylindrical, slightly bulbous at the apex; ribbed widely; furrows 
very shallow; blossom scar \ o inch in diameter. Skin color greenish 
white (pale dull green yellow) faintly laced in obscure stripes with 
pale green glass green 1. Interior pale greenish white. Mature 
fruit small, 10-12 x 6-7 inches; weight 5-6 pounds; shape much 
the same when mature edible; surface smooth with slight ridging 
at extreme apical and basal portions; skin color dull orange (orange 
buff to zinc orange) over the entire surface. Fruit stalk moderately 
short and medium heavy, 2-3 inches occasionally curved, ridged, 
woody and tough. Shell medium thick, 's inch, hard, brittle, 
cream color (warm buff). Flesh moderately thin, 3 4~1 inch; texture 
very coarse, granular and soft; color yellowish cream (pale orange 
yellow). 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium broad and 
moderately flat; 1.55 x .84 x .27 cm. I 280 per oz.); face smooth, dull 
white ^cartridge buff); margin wedge like. 

Nantucket. Refs. 14, 21, 24, 27, 31, 50, 51, 64, 65, 
90, 130. Syns. Black Negro, Black Sugar, Hard 
Shell, Nantucket Negro, Nantucket Pie, Nan- 
tucket Sugar, Negro, New Hampshire, Nigger- 
head, St. George. 
This, even older in variety lists than the Sugar 
Pie Pumpkin, was originally brought from the Azores 
as a sweet pumpkin and first grown sometime previous 
to 1860 on Cape Cod and Nantucket Island off the 



coast of Massachusetts. It was cataloged by all of 
the older seedsmen and exclusively used for Yankee 
pumpkin pies. 

The fruits of this variety are rather variable both 
as to shape and degree of ridging and furrowing. Many 
resemble Boston Pie in general shape, but have more 
pronounced ridges and depressions at the base. Others 
are more oblong and decidedly more ridged. In any 
case the blackish green skin color and the presence of 
wart-like protuberances serve to further separate it from 
other sorts in this group. 

Plant trailing; vines medium heavy, very dark green at the 
base, gradually fading into a pale green near the ends, very vigorous, 
often 20 feet long. Leaves five-lobed with terminal lobe having 
sub-sinuses; margins incised near the base of blade, otherwise 
dentate, dark green in color, sometimes blotched with gray ; petioles 
pale green. 

Fruit small; 6-7 x 8-9 inches, occasionally considerably longer 
than broad: shape oblate to nearly globular, often distinctly oblong 
fruits produced; ribbed profusely, narrow; furrows moderately 
shallow, narrow, more pronounced at the base; surface rather rough; 
moderately covered with small, irregular wart-like protuberances and 
small irregular corrugations; skin color deep glossy green, finely 
but obscurely mottled with pale green dots with the warts mottled 
with yellowish green; after storage green is replaced by yellow or 
orange. Shell very hard, although warts are rather soft. Fruit 
stalk short and thick, deeply furrowed, lighter green than the 
fruit. Flesh moderately thick, fine texture, moderately dry, sweet, 
good flavor, yellow in color. 

Omaha. Refs. 33, 41, 73, 129. 

The Omaha Indians of Nebraska grew this variety 
and from them it was secured by Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore 
along with other forms of Indian cucurbits. After a 
few years selection it was introduced in 1924 by Oscar 
H. Will 8b Co., of Bismarck, North Dakota. 

Omaha was the earliest of the winter pumpkins, 
having attained maturity at Geneva in 95 days, 5 days 
earlier than Small Sugar, 10 days earlier than Winter 
Luxury and 25 days earlier than Golden Oblong. The 
vines are decidedly shorter and less vigorous than those 
of Golden Oblong, have smaller leaves and more pointed 
and prominent terminal lobes, are smoother and darker 
green in color; also have slightly smaller flowers which 
are more crumpled and ruffled about the margins. The 
fruits are much the same in shape and color but those 
of Omaha are decidedly smaller. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, moderately weak, 
6—8 feet; branches moderately few, basal. Cotyledons short and 
medium broad, I s t x l'j inches, nearly round to short oval; apex 
rounded; color moderately light green. Leaves small, 10 x 12 inches, 
moderately deep lobed. terminal lobe broad and distinctly pointed; 
sinus moderately narrow and rounded at the base; margin slightly 
incised near the base, otherwise- serrate: surface smooth; dark green: 
petiole very short, 8-10 inches. Flower — pistillate, medium large, 
5 1 2—6 inches across, bright orange, corolla tips curved and crumpled; 
ovary somewhat balloon-like; sepals short and slender, '2 inch; 
— staminate, medium large, 5 inches across, corolla tips curved and 
crumpled; sepals moderately short and moderately heavy, Js inch; 
pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit very small, 8-9 x 5-6 inches: weight 3-4 pounds; shape 
cylindrical, full at the base and slightly depressed at the apex: 
ribbed narrowly; furrows very shallow: surface smooth; blossom 
scar with button '. t inch in diameter, slightly protuberant. Skin 
color predominantly dark orange ochraceous orange) in the form 
of a fine, delicate and uniformly distributed lace-work over the 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



45 



entire surface: specked with pale orange under-color (antimony 
yellow' within the mesh. Fruit stalk moderately short, 2 2 \ _■ 
inches and slightly curved. Shell moderately hard and thin, 
-,'„ inch, orange in color. Flesh moderately thin, :: , inch: texture 
moderately fine, rather firm, tender: moderately dry, slightly 
sweet ; quality moderately good; color pale orange (cadmium 
yellow \ Seed cavity large, conforms to fruit shape: placental 
tissue moderately abundant, rather moist, tender, rather easily 
removed. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, moderately broad 
and rather flat, 1.49 x .96 x .26 cm. i 240 per oz.); face smooth, dull 
white cartridge buffi; margin wedge-like. 

Patagonian. Refs. 14, 24, 42, 44, 48, 50, 101, 124, 
130, 137. Syns. Patagonia, Seven Years, Seven 
Years Custard. 
This was one of the rough, prominently ribbed 

pumpkins grown for stock feed and listed by Thorburn 

in 1847. It was described by Burr in 1863 as similar 

to Custard but with a green skin color. 

Plant trailing; vines very dark green at the base, very vigorous; 
leaves large, five-cleft; margin serrate; color clear green, surface 
smooth: petioles long, moderately slender, and pale green. 

Fruit moderately small, 15-18 x 8-9 inches. Shape nearly 
cylindrical to long oval; very prominently marked with distinct, 
narrow, rounded ribs extending from base to apex; furrows very broad 
and moderately deep; surface otherwise smooth. Skin color very 
dark green almost black, which is retained after full maturity. Flesh 
pale yellow, rather poor quality. 

Pen-Y-Bvd. Refs. 24, 74, 75, 76, 130. Syn. Best in 
the World. 
This is one of the early English Marrows which 
at one time was quite popular in this country. Descrip- 
tions taken from the catalog of Sutton & Sons of 1896, 
and from trial ground notes of the Central Experimental 
Station at Ottawa agree in emphasizing the quality and 
fine flavor of the fruits. The plant is of trailing habit and 
medium growth, short jointed, setting a fruit at nearly 
every joint; fruits are smooth, round, of a delicate 
creamy white color and average about 6 inches in 
diameter. It was offered in this country in 1923 by 
Carters Tested, Inc. 

Perfect Gem. Refs. 14, 25, 26, 28, 31, 33, 37, 41, 47, 

48, 50, 59, 64, 75, 89, 104, 109, 116, 117, 120, 
129, 130, 134. Syns. Cream, Gem, Little Gem. 

This was offered by Grant Thorburn of New York, 
W. Atlee Burpee of Philadelphia, and James J. H. 
Gregory & Son of Marblehead, Massachusetts, about 
1882. Although it possesses good keeping qualities, it 
is chiefly used as a late summer or fall variety. 

The variety matured in 86 days at Geneva, in 
season with Table Queen and 6 days later than Delicata. 
The vines are less vigorous than those of Table Queen 
with the leaf sinuses acute instead of rounded. The 
flowers are smaller and have distinctly shorter sepals. 
The fruits are somewhat similar in shape to Long Island 
White Bush although Perfect Gem is smaller, more 
deeply furrowed and a much deeper cream color. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, very dark green, medium vigor, 
8-10 feet: branches few, short, basal. Cotyledons moderately short 
and moderately narrow, 2 x 2 ' _> inches; oval; apex rounded; color 
moderately dark green. Leaves small, 9 x 12 inches, broadly and 



rather deeply five-cleft; sinus narrow and acute; margin denticulate; 
surface smooth, occasionally slightly blistered; color moderately 
dark green; petiole very short, 9-10 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
moderately small, 4—4 ' ■• inches across, pale orange; ovary short 
turbinate; sepais short and slender, 1 ■> inch; — staminate, moder- 
ately small, 4-4 ' i> inches across; sepals moderately short and 
moderately heavy; :1 4 inch; pedicle very short, 3}£-4 inches. 

Fruit very small, 4-5 x 5-6 inches; weight 1-1 ' ■> pounds, 
shape somewhat globular, flattened at base and apex, depressed at 
the base; ribbing narrow; furrows moderately deep; surface other- 
wise smooth. Skin color deep cream (light ochraceous buff). 
Fruit stalk short and slender, 1-2 inches, curved. Shell hard and 
thin, 1,, inch. Flesh thin, J o- 3 ., inch, thickest at the base; texture 
moderately fine, not fibrous, tender, medium dry; insipid, quality 
poor: color cream (warm buff). Seed cavity large; placental tissue 
abundant, moist, tender, rather difficult to remove. 

Seed small, short, broad and moderately flat, 1.2 x .80 x .26 
cm. (316 per oz.); face dull white (cartridge buff); margin wedge-like. 

Pineapple. Refs. 14, 21, 26, 27, 48, 50, 64, 89, 91, 
95, 101, 115, 117, 130. Syns. Early Pineapple, 
White Pineapple, White Turban. 

This was a peculiar looking variety offered by 
Landreth, Gregory, Burpee and others about 1884. The 
original seed was reputed to have come from Chili. 
W. W. Tracy reported to the Michigan Horticultural 
Society in 1885 that its poor quality would limit its 
use and apparently it was grown more as a novelty 
than as a commercial variety. 

No variety is very similar to this one. It can be 
best compared to White Bush Scallop with the fruits 
of White Pineapple distinctly longer from base to apex 
and the scallops more prominent and jagged. 

Plant trailing; vines heavy, vigorous and productive. Leaves 
large, five-lobed, pale green; petioles long and moderately slender. 

Fruit small; 8x8 inches, usually somewhat spindle-like with 
medial bordered by 5 pairs of prominent projections, as in the scallop 
varieties, some incline outward and others toward the apex or 
the base. Surface smooth; skin color nearly white; fruit stalk small, 
slender and somewhat tapered. 

Rotherside Orange. Refs. 75, 76. Syn. English 
Rotherside Orange. 

William M. Hunt & Co. of New York listed this 
English Marrow in 1919 but the variety has not proved 
popular except with the private estate gardener. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, medium vigor, 8-10 feet. Leaves 
small, dark green, marked with gray blotches along the midrib; 
petioles short and slender. 

Fruits mature edible very small, 3 3 4 ^1 x 4} j-5 inches, weight 
1— 1}4 pounds; shape oblate, slightly depressed at the apex, full at 
the base; ribbed narrowly; furrows shallow; surface otherwise 
smooth; skin color dull yellow (reed yellow); shell soft; interior 
greenish yellow. Mature fruit slightly larger, with dull orange 
yellow (ochraceous buff) skin and hard, woody shell. 

Sandwich Island. Refs. 26, 33, 41, 53, 61, 73, 129, 
130. Syns. Bugless, Bugproof, California Squash, 
Giant Prize, New Banana, Portugese. 
Sandwich Island was listed in the 1902 catalog of 
H. W. Buckbee, Rockford, Illinois, as a new variety 
coming from the Sandwich Islands. It apparently has 
no prototype in European lists but as grown at Geneva 
appears somewhat like Custard pictured in Burr's Field 
and Garden Vegetables. It has been especially recom- 
mended as drought resistant and is rather late in matur- 



46 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



ing. The names Bugless and Bugproof may have been 
used because of its rather vigorous and coarse growth. 
Mature fruits of Sandwich Isle were produced at 
Geneva in 125 days, in season with Large Tours and 
5 days later than Connecticut Field. The vines are 
decidedly heavier and much more vigorous than those of 
Connecticut Field, much as Large Tours. The leaves 
are much larger than those of Connecticut Field, more 
crumpled and have decidedly thicker spines on the 
petioles. The flowers are smaller than those of Large 
Tours and are more prominently veined. The fruits 
are often similar to Large Tours in general shape but are 
distinctly deeper furrowed and more uniform in color 
pattern. 

Plant trailing; vines very coarse and heavy, moderately dark 
green and nearly black at the base, exceedingly vigorous, 20—25 feet; 
branches medium in number, basal and medial. Cotyledons 
moderately long and medium broad, 3Js x l 5 * inches; long oval; 
apex tapered; color moderately dark green. Leaves very large, 
14 x 20 inches, five-lobed; sinus moderately deep, and rounded at 
the base; sub-sinuses shallow, on all lobes; margin incised near the 
base, otherwise serrate, moderately frilled; surface moderately 
blistered; color moderately dark, dull green; vines slightly lighter 
green; petiole moderately short and moderately heavy, 12-14 inches; 
spines distinctly thick, usually somewhat hooked. Flower — pistil- 
late, moderately large, 6 ] ■> inches across, pale orange with a distinct 
green vein through the center of each petal; ovary somewhat cylin- 
drical, distinctly ridged and furrowed; sepals very short and 
slender, almost absent, % inch or less; — staminate, moderately 
large, 6 inches across; sepals moderately short and moderately 
heavy, :1 + inch; pedicle moderately long, 9-10 inches. 

Fruit large, 15-20 x 9-12 inches; weight 25-30 pounds. 
Shape oblong, depressed at base and apex; ribbed moderately 
wide; furrows very deep and prominent, especially at base and 
apex; surface wrinkled and slightly warted. Skin covered with 
a coarse lace-like color pattern of bright green (cress green) and 
between the ribs with irregular blotches of dark green (dull greenish 
black); ground color within the mesh is pale yellow (margarite 
yellow) changing to bright yellow (cadmium yellow) during storage. 
Fruit stalk long and heavy, 5-6 inches, curved and slightly twisted, 
deeply furrowed. Shell soft and thick, Jj— 3 >, inch, variable. Flesh 
thick, 1 ] L i-2 inches; texture coarse, very fibrous, rather tough, wet; 
insipid; quality very poor; color pale buff (cream color). 

Seed medium size; medium long, narrow and moderately flat, 
1.95 x .99 x .27 cm. (128 per oz.); face smooth, dull white (cartridge 
buff); margin very slightly swollen, slightly fuzzy. 

Small Sugar. Refs. 14, 21, 24, 26, 27, 32, 33, 41, 45 

50, 51, 59, 64, 73, 74, 75, 96, 121, 129, 130. Syns 

Boston Golden Sugar, Boston Pie, Early Small 

Sugar, Early Sugar, Golden Sugar, Mothers 

Famous Pie, New Boston Golden Sugar, New 

England, New England Pie, New Yellow Sweet 

Potato Pie, Pie, Prolific Sugar, Red Sugar, Rhode 

Island Sweet, Small Sweet Sugar, Small Yellow 

Sugar, Sugar, Sugar Pie, Sugar Sweet, Sweet, 

Yellow Sugar, Yum Yum. 

This is the noted New England Pie Pumpkin grown 

throughout the Northeastern section of the country for 

use during the fall and at Thanksgiving time in making 

pumpkin pie. A familiar sight in the fall is the fields 

where the corn stalks have been cut and stacked, with 

the ground liberally spotted with golden yellow pumpkins 

that have grown unnoticed in the corn rows. This, the 

smallest of the pumpkins, is one of the sweetest and 

finest grained sorts and is also an excellent keeper. 



Described by Burr in 1863, it continues to be the most 
popular of the " Punkins." 

This variety attained maturity at Geneva in 100 
days, 5 days earlier than Winter Luxury, 20 days earlier 
than Connecticut Field and 5 days later than Omaha. 
The vines are slightly less vigorous than those of Winter 
Luxury, have leaves slightly less cut and flowers which 
are slightly smaller and darker orange in color. The 
fruits are slightly smaller, distinctly more furrowed and 
much darker in skin color, with flesh which is finer 
grained, slightly thinner but darker orange in color. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, medium vigor, 8-10 
feet, predominantly pale green, sparsely streaked with dark green; 
branches moderately many, basal. Cotyledons moderately short 
and medium broad; oval; apex moderately tapered; veining moder- 
ately prominent; color medium green. Leaves moderately small, 
10 x 14 inches, broadly five-parted; sinus narrow, rounded at the 
base; shallow sub-sinuses occasionally present on terminal lobe; 
margin slightly incised near the base, otherwise serrate, slightly 
frilled; surface smooth; color moderately dark green; petiole medium 
long and moderately slender, 12-15 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
moderately large, 6 1 _> inches, orange; ovary globular, pale yellow 
(margarite yellow) striped and laced with pale green; sepals very 
short and very slender, }4 inch; — staminate, large, 7 inches across; 
sepals moderately short and very heavy, '■ i inch; pedicle moderately 
short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit very small, 5-6 x 7-8 inches; weight 5-6 pounds. Shape 
nearly globular, flattened at base and apex, also somewhat depressed; 
ribbed narrowly; furrowed shallowly; surface wrinkled, somewhat 
obscurely pock-marked; blossom scar prominent, corky, 1-1 '4 inches 
in diameter. Skin color reddish orange (xanthine orange to orange 
rufous) spotted with dull yellow (yellow ochre) pock-marks, entire 
fruit usually finely specked with minute dark brownish dots (rnikado 
brown I. Fruit stalk moderately long, 4-5 inches, slightly curved, 
furrowed. Shell moderately hard and thin, A inch, dull orange 
(ochraceous orange); flesh moderately thick, 1}<4 — 1?2 inches; 
texture fine, tender, moderately dry; moderately sweet, quality 
good; color orange (deep chrome to capucine orange). Seed cavity 
medium size; placental tissue abundant, rather moist, stringy, 
often with a prominent core, rather easily removed. 

Seed medium size; medium long and broad, moderately plump, 
1.7 x .98 x .37 cm. (156 per oz.); face smooth, dull white (cartridge 
buff); margin wedge-like. 

Striped Field. Ref. 24. 

This was listed and described by Burr in 1863, but 
not generally carried in catalogs. The plants were 
similar in growth habit to those of Connecticut Field, 
but the fruits were usually slightly smaller. 

Fruits nearly globular to slightly oblong; skin color yellow, 
striped and variegated with green, which, during storage, assumes 
softer and paler green and deeper yellow; flesh moderately thick, 
rather coarse, moist, insipid, yellow color; quality poor. 

Summer Crookneck. Refs. 14, 19, 20, 24, 26, 27, 28, 

34, 37, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 59, 61, 64, 67, 73, 
88, 89, 95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 115, 116, 117, 120, 
121, 125, 129, 130, 132, 136, 137. Syns. Bush 
Summer Crookneck, Bush Summer Warted Crook- 
neck, Crookneck, Dwarf Summer Crookneck, 
Early Bush Summer Crookneck, Early Golden 
Crookneck, Golden Bush, Golden Summer Crook- 
neck, Long Yellow Crookneck, Summer Golden 
Crookneck, Yellow Bush Crookneck, Yellow 
Crookneck. 
The name Summer Crookneck appeared in our 
earliest garden seed catalogs, among them that of Thor- 





J 



V 



SMALL SUGAR 



(Three -fourths natural size 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



47 



burn in 1828, Hovey, 1834, and Breck, 1838. The 
variety from that time on has been listed in practically 
every catalog issued. There have been many changes 
in the name but the type has remained the same. Sturte- 
vant says, " Notwithstanding its peculiar shape and 
usually warted condition, it does not seem to have 
received much mention by the early colonists." It has 
been an important variety although it has seemed to 
experience periods of fluctuation in its popularity. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 55 
days, 5 days earlier than Giant Summer Crookneck, in 
season with English Vegetable Marrow and 5 days later 
than Earliest Prolific. The plants are less vigorous than 
those of Giant Summer Crookneck, have leaves which 
are much less blistered and pistillate flowers with smaller, 
more distinctly crooked ovaries. The mature edible 
fruits are distinctly smaller, more abruptly enlarged 
at the tip, more severely crooked, and more uniformly 
and darker orange yellow. 

Plant bush; central stem moderately coarse, heavy, very dark 
green, moderately vigorous; branches moderately few, basal; spread 
3-3 ' 2 feet. Cotyledons short and medium broad, 1 3 4 x 1 ' j inches; 
nearly round; apex rounded; veining moderately prominent; color 
moderately grayish green. Leaves medium large, 12 x 14 inches, 
broadly five-lobed; sinuses narrow and rounded at the base; margin 
slightly incised near the base, otherwise dentate; surface rather 
rough, slightly blistered; color dark glossy green; petiole medium 
long and moderately heavy, 15-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
medium large, 5 inches across, orange; ovary club-like, constricted 
and curved near the base; sepals very short and slerder, *4 inch; 
— staminate, medium large, 5 1 2 inches; sepals moderately short and 
heavy, 3 ± inch; pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 8-9 inches long, 2 3 4 -3 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 1-1 : 4 inches at the base; shape club-like, 
distinctly curved between base and medial, abruptly enlarged, 
bulbous at the apex; ribbed very narrowly and irregularly; furrows 
moderately deep; surface warted. Skin color golden yellow (apricot 
yellow). Interior pale yellowish white. Mature fruit very small, 
9-10 inches long, 3 3 4^ inches in diameter at the apex and 1 I 2~1 3 4 
inches at the base. Shape much the same when mature edible; 
surface very rough, with warts and corrugations more accentuated. 
Blossom scar with button 's- 1 ' > n ch in diameter, slightly extended. 
Skin color deep orange (orange) over the whole fruit. Fruit stalk 
short and slender, 1-1} 2 inches, slightly curved and twisted, shal- 
lowly furrowed, expanded at attachment. Shell thick, J §— J 4 inch, 
variable, hard and woody, pale orange (antimony yellow) layer 
between shell and flesh. Flesh thin, 1 4- 3 s inch at medial and apex, 
solid at base; texture moderately fine, somewhat granular, soft, 
cream color 1 buff yellow 1 . 

Seed small; short, broad and moderately flat, 1.23 x .74 x .25 
cm. (464 per oz. ); face moderately smooth, dull white flight buff); 
margin wedge-like. 

Table Dainty. Refs. 74, 75, 76. 

This variety produces fruits very attractive and 
distinctive and is used in this country by those who 
are familiar with the English marrows. It was intro- 
duced by Sutton & Sons of Reading, England, in 1909, 
and has remained as one of the most popular varieties 
in its group. 

It is a small prolific sort very much shorter and 
more symmetrical than Cocozelle. The striping is, how- 
ever, similar to some strains, particularly that of Italian 
Rapid Bush. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, very vigorous, 18-20 
feet; branches many, basal and medial. 



Fruit mature edible stage very small, 6-7 x 3-4 inches; weight 
1 ' 2 1 3 1 lbs. Shape short cylindrical, very uniform and symmetrical, 
full at base and apex; surface smooth. Skin color alternate stripes 
of dark green (dull greenish black) and pale green (cress green) 
with the latter in the form of lace-like pattern, between the mesh 
of which is a buff (barium yellow) under color; after storage the pale 
green is replaced by golden yellow. Shell soft and thin. Interior 
nearly solid. Mature fruits slightly larger and develop color 
changes as noted above; flesh coarse and moist, poor quality. 

Table Queen. Refs. 33, 41, 73, 83, 84, 87, 129. Syns. 
Acorn, Danish, Danish Table Queen, Des Moines, 
Des Moines Market, Individual, New Acorn, 
Queen Anne, Yama. 

This variety of comparatively recent introduction 
into seed trade lists has rapidly gained prominence and 
is now found in the markets throughout the country. 
The introduction of this variety has completely revived 
the use of the small fall squash and other varieties 
similar in growth habit and use which were popular 
40 years ago. 

The Iowa Seed Co., Des Moines, Iowa, in their 
catalog of 1913 listed and showed an excellent illustration 
of Table Queen, and predicted that it would become a 
favorite in years to come. The earlier history of the 
variety is uncertain but no evidence has been put 
forward to dispute the claim that it was first grown 
commercially in the region about Des Moines. The 
name Danish squash was used on the market, but there 
is no evidence that the variety came from that country. 
On the contrary, Geo. F. Will of Bismarck, North 
Dakota, has reported that the Arikara tribe of Indians 
" grew a black heart-shaped squash very similar in 
appearance to Table Queen but not its equal in quality." 
At the time of its introduction there had been in culti- 
vation for many years several varieties of the running 
fall squash (pepos). The exact history of all of these 
is missing. Apparently they arose unheralded and the 
fact that they were in a fairly staple form when intro- 
duced would indicate that they had existed for a long 
time. 

Strains with both golden yellow and ivory colored 
fruits exist but the typical dark green colored squash 
is the only form as yet popularized. Several times the 
name White Table Queen has been listed but it has 
never become commercially important. 

The variety attained maturity at Geneva in 86 
days, which was in season with Fordhook and Perfect 
Gem, and 6 days later than Delicata. The vines are 
more vigorous than those of Delicata, have larger leaves 
which are much more deeply lobed and distinctly darker 
green in color. The flowers are slightly larger with 
distinctly larger and broader sepals in the pistillate forms. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, moderately vigorous, 12-15 feet; 
branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons very short and 
narrow, l?s x 1 ' s inches, short oval to nearly round; apex rounded; 
veining prominent, color dark grayish green. Leaves small, 10x12 
inches, broadly five-lobed; sinuses narrow, rounded at the base, 
2-4 sub-sinuses on terminal lobe; margin denticulate, slightly 
frilled; surface occasionally somewhat blistered; color dark green; 
petiole short and slender, 10-12 inches. Flower — pistillate, 
medium large, 5-5 '2 inches across, pale orange; ovary turbinate, 
ridged; sepals medium long and moderately slender, lU'-lJ^ 



48 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



inches, somewhat leaf -like; — staminate, medium large, 5 1 ? inches 
across; sepals medium long, 1*4 inches, small leaf-like terminations 
present; pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit very small, 5-6 x 4-4 ' •_> inches; weight 1 1 4 -1 3 4 pounds. 
Shape turbinate, tapering rather abruptly from the medial to the 
apex; ribbed widely; furrowed deeply: surface smooth; blossom scar 
with button, J 4 inch in diameter, slightly extended. Skin color 
very dark green I deep dull blackish green i during storage changing 
to dull orange izinc orange 1 , somewhat diffused with dull green. 
Fruit stalk moderately short and slender, 2-3 inches, curved and 
often twisted, ribbed. Shell hard and thin, rs inch. Flesh thin, 
| inch, thickest at the base and medial, texture firm, tender, 
moderately dry, often rather fibrous; good flavor and moder- 
ately sweet: color pale orange orange buff to light orange yell w 
quality good. Seed cavity moderately large, conforms to fruit 
shape; placental tissue medium, moist, rather fibrous, moderately 
easy to remove. 

Seed small; short, broad and medium plump, 1.36 x .83 x .30 
cm. 284 per oz.); face smooth, dull white cartridge buff;; margin 
wedge-like. 

Tender and True. Refs. 74, 75. 

This marrow, introduced as a novelty in 1907 by 
Sutton & Sons, Reading, England, belongs to the semi- 
trailing class and produces abundantly its prettily 
mottled fruits. The fruits of this variety are similar 
to those of Epicure in the mature edible stage, although 
somewhat more nearly globular and deeper green in 
color. At the mature stage these two are distinct in 
shape, color and surface markings. 

Plant semi-trailing; vines medium vigor, short: branches few. 
Leaves very small, 8x9 inches, rather deeply five-cleft, medium 
green, occasionally blotched with gray; margin dentate, slightly 
frilled. 

Fruit mature edible stage very small, 4-5 x 5-6 inches, weight 
2 ' jj-3 pounds. Shape nearly globular, distinctly flattened at base 
and apex: ribbed widely, furrowed moderately deep at base and 
apex; surface otherwise smooth. Skin color usually striped very 
narrowly with dull blackish green and alternately striped with 
1 4 inch bands of pale greenish yellow t barium yellow i in the form 
of a lace-like pattern, through the mesh of which pale yellow appears. 
Shell soft and thin. Interior nearly solid. Mature fruits slightly 
larger and the colors more intense, otherwise much the same. 

Tours. Refs. 14, 21, 27, 32, 33, 41, 50. 73, 101. 125, 

129, 130, 137. Syns. Citronille, French Tours, 

Jumbo Squash, Large Touraine, Large Tours, 

Mammoth French, Mammoth Tours, Touraine. 

This large pumpkin, used chiefly for stock feed. 

was named for the district in France where it supposedly 

originated. Peter Henderson & Co. of New York listed 

the variety in 1873 and the large size of the fruits proved 

to be an adequate incentive to keep it in cultivation 

for a number of years. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 125 
days, in season with Sandwich Island and 5 days later 
than Connecticut Field. The vines are decidedly more 
vigorous than those of Connecticut Field, have much 
larger and more crumpled leaves, more profusely blotched 
with gray. The flowers are much larger, more promi- 
nently veined and streaked with pale yellow. The 
fruits are considerably larger, more oblong, and exceed- 
ingly more variable in color. 

Plant trailing: vines very coarse and heavy, very vigorous, 
20-25 feet; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons very 
long and very broad, 4', x 2'_. inches, long oval; apex rounded: 



veining moderately prominent; color medium green. Leaves very 
large, 14 x 18 inches, rather deeply and broadly five-lobed; sinus 
narrow, rounded at the base; sub-sinuses shallow, on all lobes; 
margin incised near the base, otherwise serrate, slightly frilled; sur- 
face crumpled, often coarsely blistered; color dark green, often 
marked with irregular gray blotches along the veins or at the inter- 
sections with the veinlets; petiole medium long and very heavy, 
12-15 inches. Flower — pistillate, very large, 8 inches across; 
corolla orange, prominently marked at the base and along the veins of 
the petals with pale yellowish white; ovary light green lacing, 
regularly and narrowly striped with moderately dark green and 
specked with pale yellow; sepals very short and moderately slender, 

. inch; — staminate, very large, 8 ] 2— 9 inches across, colored 
similarly to pistillate flowers; sepals moderately short and very heavy, 
3 4~'i inch: pedicle moderately long, 8-10 inches. 

Fruit very large, 20-24 x 15-18 inches; 30-35 pounds. Shape 
oblong, somewhat irregular, often somewhat flattened at base and 
apex; ribbed medium narrow; furrows moderately shallow; surface 
rather smooth, somewhat bumpy and uneven: blossom scar 
depressed, ] £-1 inch in diameter. Skin color variable, predomi- 
nantly dark green (dull blackish green i in the form of a coarse, 
irregularly laced pattern, striped pale orange yellow I orange buff i 
to conform with the most prominent depressions. The green occurs 
in broad stripes 3—4 inches wide which contain numerous small, 
angular i orange buff) blotches. Some fruits are (cream colon 
to a light grayish green i light bice green ^ lace pattern with glass 
green I mesh. Fruit stalk moderately long and heavy, 4—5 inches, 
slightly curved, rough, ridged, woody and tough, expanded at 
attachment. Shell soft and moderately thick, ! .. -> 4 inch. Flesh 
moderately thick, l^-l'j inches, very coarse, tough, stringy, wet; 
slightly sweet, quality very poor; color pale amber I maize yellow). 
Seed cavity very large, conforms to fruit shape; placental tissue 
comparatively little, rather dry, easily removed. 

Seed large, long, narrow and moderately plump, 2.5 x 1.47 x .36 
cm. (96 per oz. ' : face very finely wrinkled to nearly smooth, dis- 
tinctly compressed, dull white cartridge buff ) ; margin very distinct, 
distinctly ridged, rounded and swollen, smooth. 

Variegated Bush Scalloped. Ref. 24, 50, 101. Syns. 
Improved Variegated Custard Marrow, Varie- 
gated Patty Pan. 

Burr in 1863 describes this squash very briefly as 
" pale yellow, or nearly white, variegated with green, 
handsome but of inferior quality." Fruits of the variety 
are pictured in the 1883 edition of Vilmorin. 

White Bush Seallop. Refs. 14, 19, 20, 24, 25, 26, 

27, 28, 32, 33, 34, 37, 41, 46. 48, 49. 50, 52, 59, 
61. 64, 67, 73, 74, 75, 76, 88, 89, 91, 94, 95, 98, 
100. 101, 115, 116, 120, 129, 130, 132, 137. Syns. 
Arlington White Bush Scallop, Cylinder Squash, 
Cymbling, Dollar Squash, Dow's Extra Early 
White Bush, Dwarf White Bush, Earliest White 
Bush, Early Bush Scallop, Early Dawn, Early 
White Bush, Extra Early Bush. Extra Early 
Dawn, Extra Early Jersey White Bush, Extra 
Early Patty Pan, Jersey White Bush, Light 
White Bush, Perfection Bush Scallop Patty Pan, 
Silver Custard, Superba White Bush, White 
Patty Pan. 

The form of Cucurbita now generally known as 
Bush or Summer squash was one of the first vegetables 
which the early explorers and settlers noticed in use by 
the Aborigines. The word squash seems to have been 
derived from " askuta-squash " or " squonter-squashes " 
and it is now generally thought that the name applied 




SUMMER CROOKNECK 



Two-thirds natural size) 




TABLE QUEEN 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



49 



to what we now call summer squash. The fruits were 
called " quaasiens," " Sitroules," " symnels,'* or " cim- 
nels." Robert Beverley in his " History of Virginia " 
in 1722 speaks of the shield -shaped or clypeate kinds 
and says that they are sometimes called cymnels, from 
the Lenten cake of that name, which many of them 
very much resemble. He adds that the northern Indians 
call them squash or squanter -squash. 

While in most sections they are called Scallop 
squash, yet in certain localities they are known as 
Patty-pans, a word derived from their resemblance to 
a crimped pan used in the kitchen for baking pies. In 
Sturtevant's Notes there are many citations to the Bush 
or Summer Squash indicating that they were known 
in Europe in the Sixteenth Century. They have, because 
of earliness, always been a popular sort and their use 
is increasing, especially when taken in the very young 
stages of fruit development. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 56 
days, 4 days earlier than Yellow Bush Scallop, and 2 
days later than Long Island White Bush. The plants 
are slightly more vigorous than those of Long Island 
White Bush and have slightly larger leaves. The pis- 
tillate flowers are larger and have ovaries which are 
decidedly more deeply scalloped. The mature edible 
fruits are much more irregular and deeply scalloped, 
and retain the white skin color much longer after full 
maturity. 

Piant bush; central stem coarse, moderately vigorous, spread 
3 ! j-4 feet; branches moderately few, basal. Cotyledons moderately 
short and medium broad, 2' 4 x l' : > inches, oval; apex moderately 
rounded; color moderately dark green. Leaves moderately large, 
12 x 15 inches, broadly five-cleft; sinus moderately deep, acute; 
margin slightly incised near the base, otherwise denticulate, slightly 
frilled; surface moderately blistered, occasionally somewhat 
crumpled; color dark glossy green; petiole long and heavy, 18-20 
inches. Flower — pistillate, moderately large, 6 inches across, 
orange; ovary disk -like, very deeply scalloped; sepals very short and 
very slender, '4 inch; — staminate, large, 7 inches across; sepals 
medium long and slender, 1 inch; pedicle short, 6-7 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 2 1 2~3 x 5-7 inches; shape disk-like, 
ribbed widely; furrows deep; surface wrinkled, occasionally some- 
what waited: skin color nearly white. Mature fruits very small, 
3-3 1 •> x 7 ] 2~9 inches; weight 2 ] 2-3 pounds. Shape broad, bowl- 
like, very prominently marked with large projections about the 
periphery of the medial, usually perpendicular to the stem, but 
often turned towards the base; surface nearly smooth, occasionally 
slightly warted, very shallowly creased to conform with stem 
ridges; skin color white: fruit stalk moderately short and slender, 
2 ' 2-3 inches, slightly curved, shallowly furrowed, expanded at 
attachment. Shell hard, brittle and thin, ' g inch creamy white 
cartridge buffi. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, moderately broad 
and moderately flat, 1.42 x .77 x .24 cm. (296 per oz. ; face smooth, 
very pale, glossy yellowish buff pale ochraceous salmon); margin 
wedge-like. 

\Uiitr Summer Crookneck. Refs. 33, 41, 64, 
73, 129, 130. Syns. Cream-colored Crookneck, 
Early White Crookneck, Giant White Summer 
Crookneck. 
This rather beautiful summer Crookneck was intro- 
duced in 1895 by the originators, D. M. Ferry 8s Co., 
of Detroit, Michigan. Its parentage is unknown but 



it was said to have resulted from a cross made on the 
Ferry farms. The variety is listed by a few firms today 
but in general a Crookneck with some yellow color is 
preferred. 

The fruits of this variety resembled these of Summer 
Crookneck in all respects except in color of skin, which 
was an ivory white over the entire surface. 

Winter Luxury. Refs. 17, 26, 27, 28, 31, 33, 38, 73, 

90, 97, 115, 121, 130. Syns. Golden Russet, 
Livingston's Pie Squash, Luxury Pie, New Pie, 
New Winter Luxury, Pie, Queen, Queen Luxury, 
Standard Pie, Winter Queen. 
This pumpkin of high quality was introduced inde- 
pendently as Winter Luxury in 1893 by Johnson & 
Stokes of Philadelphia and as Livingston's Pie Squash 
in 1894 by A. W. Livingston's Sons of Columbus, Ohio. 
Livingston reported having found it in the garden of 
one of his farmer customers who had grown it many 
years. The fine and close netting resembled that found 
on seme muskmelons and the beautiful golden yellow 
color caused some to note its general color resemblance 
to the russet apple. 

Gill Bros., Portland, Oregon, in 1920 offered Orange 
Winter Luxury with fruits which compared with the 
original with the exception of the general ground color 
which was of a rich orange instead of the lighter lemon 
yellow. This strain has gradually replaced the old and 
is that described below. 

Winter Luxury matured at Geneva in 105 days, 
which was 15 days earlier than Connecticut Field and 
5 days later than Small Sugar. The vines are somewhat 
more vigorous than those of Small Sugar, have leaves 
which are somewhat more cut and flowers which are 
larger and paler orange in color. The fruits are slightly 
larger, much less furrowed and somewhat lighter in 
color, while the flesh is thicker but lighter orange in color. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, moderately vigorous, 10-12 feet 
long, very dark green at the base; branches moderately many, basal. 
Cotyledons moderately long and moderately broad, 2 ' 2 x 1 5 5 inches', 
long oval: apex moderately rounded; color moderately light green. 
Leaves moderately small, 11 x 14 inches, broadly five-lobed, moder- 
ately deep; sinuses rounded at the base: margin rather deeply incised 
near the base of the blade, remainder serrate, very slightly frilled; 
surface smooth and occasionally slightly crumpled; color dark 
green; petiole medium long and slender, 10-12 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, medium size, 5-6 inches across, yellow; ovary globular; 
sepals short and moderately slender, 3 s inch; — staminate, medium 
size, 6-6 '2 inches across; sepals medium long and heavy, 3 4 inch; 
pedicle moderately short, 8-9 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-7 x 9-10 inches; weight 7-8 pounds. 
Shape nearly globular, distinctly depressed at base and apex; 
ribbed rather narrowly; furrows shallow; blossom scar depressed, 
somewhat corky, 1 ' j-1 \i inches in diameter; surface uniformly 
and finely laced with a light gray 1 cartridge buff), very shallow, 
cork-like netting; skin color orange ochraceous orange to zinc 
orange 1. Fruit stalk long and moderately slender, 5-6 inches, 
slightly curved, rough, moderately deep-ridged, woody and tough, 
slightly expanded at attachment. Shell moderately hard and thin, 
,',,- ' a inch. Flesh moderately thick, 1 ] •_< 1 ' j inches, thickest at 
the medial; texture moderately fine, slightly juicy, tender; slightly 
sweet, quality good: color pale orange (ochraceous buff). Seed cavity 
moderately large; placental tissue moderately moist, tender and 
easily removed. 



50 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Seed moderately small, moderately short, medium width and 
flat, 1.16 x .86 x .21 cm. (248 per oz.); face smooth, dull white 
(cartridge buff) ; margin wedge-like. 

Yellow Bush Seallop. Refs. 6, 14, 24, 26, 27, 32, 33, 

41, 47, 48, 50, 52, 61, 64, 67, 73, 74, 75, 89, 101, 
125, 129, 130, 132, 136, 137. Syns. Custard Mar- 
row, Custard Vegetable Marrow, Early Golden 
Bush, Early Golden Custard, Early Yellow Bush 
Scallop, Gold Bush, Golden Bush, Golden Scallop, 
Lemon Scallop Bush, Yellow Elector's Cap, 
Yellow Patty Pan, Yellow Summer Scallop. 

This, the companion variety to White Bush Scallop, 
has been mentioned in the earliest variety records avail- 
able. Its use has not been as general as that of the 
white form and consequently it is not mentioned as 
often. Burr in 1863 considered the White to be a sub- 
variety of Early Yellow Bush but no definite record 
which would establish the relative age of the two sorts 
is available. Since the " shield shaped or clypeate 
kinds " were mentioned by Robert Beverly 1 it is probable 
that the separate colors were then known and grown 
by the Indians. Although found in some catalogs prior 
to 1860, it was not until after that date that both the 
white and yellow scallops were commonly listed. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 60 
days, in season with Giant Summer Crookneck, 4 days 
later than White Bush Scallop and 7 daj's later than 
Golden Custard. The plants are less vigorous than 
those of Golden Custard, have slightly smaller leaves 
which are darker green, smoother, less glossy, and 
have darker colored, more slender petioles. The mature 
edible fruits are smaller, thicker and decidedly more 
regularly scalloped. 

Plant bush; central stem coarse and heavy, medium vigor, 
spread 3-3 'i feet; branches few, basal and medial. Cotyledons 
moderately short and moderately narrow, 2 x \ l ± inches, oval; 
apex moderately rounded; veining prominent; color rather grayish 
green. Leaves medium large, 10 x 15 inches, broadly five-cleft; 
sinuses narrow and acute; margin partly incised near the base, 
otherwise serrate, slightly frilled; surface rough, slightly crumpled; 
color moderately dark green, occasionally somewhat glossy; petiole 
medium long and moderately heavy, 14-16 inches, moderately 
dark green. Flower — pistillate, medium large, 5 inches across, 
orange; ovary thickened, disk-like; sepals very short and slender, 
. :nch; — staminate, medium large, 5' £ inches across; sepals 
medium long and heavy, 1J^ inches; pedicle very short, 4—5 inches. 
Fruit mature edible 2-3 x 6-7 inches; shape disk-like; ribbed 
widely, furrows deep; surface smooth; skin color deep yellow (lemon 
chrome) irregularly mottled with pale yellow (citron yellow). 
Interior yellowish white, solid. Mature fruit very small, 3^1 x 8-9 
inches; weight 3^1 pounds. Shape thickened disk -like, base slightly 
rounded, nearly flat, apex and part of medial shallowly rounded, 
extreme apex slightly depressed, medial rather regularly scalloped 
about the periphery, pointed towards the base; surface nearly 
smooth, very sparsely warted; blossom scar very large, conspicuous, 
2-2 ' 2 inches in diameter, depressed, surrounded by a corky ring, 
somewhat irregular in outline. Skin color light orange capucine 
yellow) indistinctly and irregularly mottled with paler orange 
i cadmium yellow I largely conforming with the furrows between the 
scallops. Fruit stalk short and moderately slender, 1 } 2-2 inches 
slightly curved, hard and woody, ridged. Shell very hard, brittle 
and thin ' . ,\ inch, pale orange yellow (antimony yellow). Flesh 



fibrous structure, medium coarse, soft, thin at the base and medial, 
". '4 inch, solid at the scallops, creamy buff icreain color). 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, moderately broad 
and moderately flat, 1.44 x .90 x .25 cm. (.284 per oz. ) ; face smooth, 
dull yellowish buff (pale ochraceous salmon i ; margin wedge-like. 

Zucchini. Refs. 33, 73, 86, 129. Syns. Italian, 
Spanish Squash. 

In this country the variety name Zucchini seems to 
have been used first in California for it was listed by 
both Germain Seed Co. and by Aggeler & Musser of 
Los Angeles, California, about 1921. Since 1932 it has 
been found occasionally in catalogs of eastern seed 
houses, and now represents a very definite type. 

In 1934 D. V. Burrell of Rocky Ford, Colorado, 
introduced Grey Zucchini. At Geneva this strain was 
intermediate in color between Boston Greek and Zucchini. 
In other respects the two were much the same. 

First edible fruits were produced at Geneva in 53 
days, 2 days earlier than Italian Vegetable Marrow, in 
season with Moore's Cream and 1 day later than Boston 
Greek. The plants are considerably less vigorous than 
those of Italian Marrow and have leaves which are much 
smaller, decidedly more cut and blotched with gray. 
The pistillate flowers are slightly smaller and have less 
cylindrical ovaries. The mature edible fruits are very 
much the same as Boston Greek in size and shape, but 
are distinctly darker green in color. 

Plant bush; central stem moderately heavy, dark green; 
branches moderately many, basal and medial, medium vigor. 
Cotyledons moderately long and moderately broad, 2- 1 x 1 •' „ inches; 
long oval; apex tapered; color light green. Leaves small, 9 x 10 
inches, narrowly five-cleft having many sub-sinuses; sinuses very 
deep, slightly lacerated; margin incised, distinctly and finely frilled; 
surface moderately smooth; color dark dull green, profusely marked 
with small gray blotches along the midribs and intersections with 
the veinlets; petiole moderately long and slender, 14-16 inches. 
Flower — pistillate, medium size, 5-5 '« inches across, orange; 
ovary somewhat club-like; sepals short and slender, '4 inch; — 
staminate, medium size, 5-5 \ _> inches across; sepals moderately shoi t 
and moderately slender, -'4 inch; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit mature edible stage 10-12 inches long, 2 ' j-3 inches in 
diameter at the apex; shape somewhat cylindrical, slightly enlarged at 
the apex; surface smooth, blossom scar small, slightly extended. Skin 
color effect moderately dark green; ground color pale yellow ivory 
yellow 1 profusely and heavily marked with very dark green (dull 
greenish black 1 lace-like color pattern over the entire fruit; con- 
centrated to form narrow, distinct, nearly solid dark green stripes 
which conform to the ridges at the base of the fruit. Fruit stalk 
short and thick, 1 inch, deeply ridged and expanded at the point 
of attachment; marked with a dark green lace-like color pattern 
similar to that on the fruit. Shell soft, thin. Flesh thin, ' j- 3 4 inch, 
moderately fine texture, slightly stringy in older fruits, quality 
good; color pale greenish white (sea foam green 1. Mature fruit 
12-14 inches long, 3' L >-3 :i 4 inches at the base and 4 1 _>~*'i inches 
at the apex; weight 4'j-6 pounds. Shape same as during mature 
edible stage. Color creamy yellow 1 warm buff) with a lace-like 
color pattern of pale orange (capucine orange). Flesh VI inch 
thick, pale creamy yellow (buff yellow) very coarse; seed cavity 
large, conforms to fruit shape; placental tissue abundant, coarse, 
stringy and difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium width and 
thickness, slightly inflated, 1.58 x .90 x .35 cm. 184 per oz.); face 
smooth, dull white 1 pale olive buff.) : margin wedge-like. 



'Beverly. R. History of Virginia. 124. 1705. 




I 



/ 




/ 








I 



(Two-thirds natural size 



WHITE BUSH SCALLOP 





*&zm 



^■>-' 



(Three-fourths natural size) 



WINTER LUXURY 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



51 



CUCURBITA MOSCHATA 

Of the three species treated in this chapter, this one 
is the least popular in the northern states. As pointed 
out in the first chapter, this group is believed to be more 
closely allied to the original form from which the genus 
Cucurbita arose, and consequently is represented in a 
more diverse variation in the tropics. Certain types, 
among which were the Striped Crookneck and the 
Puritan, have been recorded in our eastern states from 
the time of the earliest colonies. Moreover, the Indians 
were known to have grown the Winter Crookneck along 
with forms of pepos. The Seminole Indians of Florida 
were likewise known to have used a variety which bears 
the name of this tribe. 

Although the types of several modern varieties are 
recognized as being in existence in pre-colonial days, 
the dates are not known in many instances when the 
names were applied. The first authentic reference to a 
variety as we know it is in relation to Cheese, a variety 
listed by Thorburn in 1824. Canada Crookneck 
apparently was named and introduced about 1834 by 
Hovey. There were apparently two groups of Cushaws 
at or before this time. One line, which included Winter 
Crookneck, Canada Crookneck and Golden Cushaw, 
possessed the slightly furrowed, ridged and expanded 
peduncle. Other varieties possessing similar stem char- 
acteristics of this group included Quaker Pie, introduced 
in 1884, Calhoun in 1891 and Virginia Mammoth in 
1895. The other group having a distinctly fleshy, thick, 
maxima-like peduncle included the Green Striped 
Cushaw, Puritan and Tennessee Sweet Potato intro- 
duced in 1883, Japanese Pie in 1884, and White 
Cushaw in 1891. The introduction of Yokohama in 
1862 ( followed by Chirimen, Kikuza and Saikyo some 50 
years later) invites considerable interest as to how this 
type, so diverse from American sorts, was established 
in Japan. 

This species is of the least economic importance of 
the three in the north and east. Some of its varieties 
are rather widely grown in the southern states and are 
acknowledged to be delightful. Twenty varieties are 
included in this account. Several obscure varieties, 
about which little is known, as well as a few varieties 
now grown in foreign countries, are also listed. 

Bugle Gramma. Refs. 39, 40. Syns. Gramma, 
Trombone. 

This is the most popular moschata grown in Australia 
and in type of fruit is quite similar to our Golden Cushaw. 
A number of the Cushaw pumpkins grown in the South 
are also grown in Australia and are used both as pie 
pumpkins and as food for stock. 

This variety was the last to mature at Geneva, 
having required 145 days, 10 days later than Chirimen 
and 20 days later than Golden Cushaw. The vines are 
most like those of Chirimen and Kikuza and are decidedly 
more vigorous than those of Golden Cushaw, with leaves 
having more gray blotches and more distinct decurrent 
blades than those of the latter. The flowers are much 
larger, more brilliantly colored and have larger ovaries 



and sepals. The fruits are considerably longer and 
more uniformly cylindrical at the base and medial. 

Plant trailing: vines moderately slender, very dark green, very 
vigorous, 20 25 feet; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons 
medium long and medium broad, 2 ' £ x 1 ' j inches, nearly rect- 
angular: apex rounded, slightly notched; veining prominent; color 
grayish green. Leaves medium large, 11 x 15 inches very shallowly 
5-lobed, terminal one distinctly tapered; distinctly decurrent; 
margin slightly serrated at the base otherwise very finely denticu- 
late, slightly frilled; surface moderately smooth, occasionally some- 
what coarsely blistered; auricles distinctly imbricate, ascending, 
vertically parallel; color very dark green, moderately marked with 
small gray blotches at the intersections; petiole moderately long and 
moderately slender, 15-18 inches, very dark green. Flower — pistil- 
late, very large, 8 ' ■> inches across, pale orange often streaked with 
creamy white; ovary very large, crooked, enlarged at the apex, pale 
green, irregularly streaked and spotted with pale yellow; stigma very 
prominent, compact, deep orange red; petals terminate in green 
tip * _> inch long; sepals very long and broad, 2-2 ,' ■> inches, often 
with leaf-like appendages; — staminate, moderately large, 6 inches 
across; sepals moderately long and very broad, lj^-l% inches, 
fuzzy; pedicle moderately long, 9-10 inches, often very much longer, 
extending above the foliage. 

Fruit large; 26-30 inches long, 8-10 inches in diameter at the 
apex and 4-5 inches at the base and medial; weight 20-25 pounds. 
Shape crookneck, with extreme apex abruptly bulbous, with base 
and medial a curved cylinder; moderately ribbed; furrows shallow; 
surface wrinkled, leather -like; blossom scar with button ' 4 inch long, 
surrounded by a cork-like scar %— 1J4 inches in diameter. Skin 
color light brown mars yellow to ochraceous tawny I covered with 
a heavy bloom. Fruit stalk moderately long and medium heavy, 
4-5 inches, curved, moderately furrowed, very spiny, woody and 
tough, expanded at base. Shell soft and medium thick, J g inch. 
Flesh medium thick at apex, 1-1 J/j inches, solid at medial and 
base; texture coarse, juicy, very fibrous; distinctly sweet, pale 
salmon orange icapucine orange); quality poor. Seed cavity 
small, at apex; placental tissue little, stringy, salmon pink, moder- 
ately moist, difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately narrow and 
moderately flat, 1.86 x .96 x .28 cm. (184 per oz.); face rather rough 
and wrinkled (tilleul buff); margin slightly swollen, crinkled and 
fuzzy, brown (fawn). 

Calhoun. Refs. 15, 28, 31, 33, 41, 64, 129, 130. Syns. 

New Thanksgiving Pumpkin, Thanksgiving Pie. 

This was originated by a Mr. Calhoun and was 
introduced in 1891 by Peter Henderson & Co. of New 
York. It undoubtedly was a selection from Cheese 
for it is similar to that variety in many respects. This 
variety has been popular in the Middle West where it has 
been grown as Thanksgiving Pie. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 110 days, 
in season with Cheese and 10 days earlier than Quaker 
Pie. The vines are considerably less vigorous than those 
of Cheese, have leaves which are more profusely blotched 
with gray and have slightly smaller flowers with more 
globular ovaries. The fruits are practically the same 
color but are considerably smaller and thicker. 

Plant trailing; vines very slender, moderately light green, 
medium vigor, 8-10 feet; branches many, basal and medial. Cotyle- 
dons medium long and moderately narrow, 2J4 * 1/4 inches; rect- 
angular; apex rather truncate; veining prominent; color moderately 
pale grayish green. Leaves small, 8 x 11 inches, nearly entire; 
auricles moderately decurrent; margin distinctly serrated and 
incised near the base, otherwise denticulate; surface smooth; color 
moderately dark green, profusely marked with small, gray blotches 
along the veins and at the intersections of the veinlets; petiole 
moderately short and slender, 12-14 inches; spines very many, 
moderately long and slender. Flowers — pistillate large, 7-7 ) ■> inches 



52 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



across, orange; ovary balloon-like, pale green, mottled and spotted 
with pale yellow; sepals medium long and moderately heavy, 
1*4 inches, leaf-like at the tip; — staminate medium large, 5'_>-6 
inches across; sepals moderately long and heavy, 1 J _> inches, leaf- 
like at the tip; pedicle moderately short, 7-8 inches. 

Fruit small, 6-7 x 9-10 inches; weight 8-10 pounds. Shape 
nearly globular, flattened much at base and apex, slightly depressed 
at both ends; ribbed widely: furrows moderately shallow; surface 
smooth; blossom scar ; ; - 1 inch in diameter, depressed and blackened. 
Skin color consists of a uniform lace-like pattern of cream (cinnamon 
buff) over the entire surface, through the mesh of which shows a 
ground color of pale cream (pale ochraceous buff). Fruit stalk 
medium long 3-4 inches, slightly curved, moderately furrowed, 
woody, tough, and decidedly expanded at the base. Shell moder- 
ately soft and thin, fg inch. Flesh moderately thick, l'-i-l^ 
inches, slightly thinner at the apex; texture very coarse, fibrous, 
juicy and rather tough; moist, sweet; color pale orange salmon 
(capucine orange I. Seed cavity moderately large; placental tissue 
very abundant, moist, tough, very coarse and fibrous, cord-like, very 
difficult to remove. 

Seed medium size; medium length and medium breadth, moder- 
ately flat, 1.7 x .93 x .23 cm. (216 per oz. I; face rather rough and 
scaly, buff tilleul buff); margin rounded, crinkled and stringy; 
brownish fawn color). 

Canada Crookneck. Refs. 14, 24, 26, 37, 42, 43, 44, 

50, 59, 61, 64, 101, 102, 114, 130, 136, 137. Syns. 
Canada, Canadian Winter Crookneck. 

The Crooknecks were, in early times, the chief winter 
squashes available and as such were of course very 
popular. This variety was one of the very earliest 
recorded by American seedsmen as it was listed by Hovey 
in 1834, by Breck in 1838 and Thorburn in 1840. Canada, 
one of the best of the Crooknecks, came to maturity 
about the same time as Autumnal Marrow and was 
much esteemed as a table vegetable. 

This was the smallest of the cushaw group. The 
fruits were more uniformly cream colored and were 
finer grained than those of Winter Crookneck; also 
the plants had smaller leaves and a less vigorous vine 
growth. 

Plant trailing; vines very dark green, slender, moderately 
vigorous. Leaves small, very dark green, moderately shallow, 
5-lobed; blades decurrent; margin dentate. 

Fruit small, 10-12 inches long, 5-6 inches in diameter at the 
apex; 1 ' _>-2 inches at the base and medial. Shape crookneck, with 
apex distinctly and abruptly swollen and the neck slender and 
distinctly curved; surface nearly smooth, slightly wrinkled, some- 
what leatherlike. Skin color creamy-yellow, covered with a heavy 
bloom. Fruit stalk slender, tapering, expanded at the base, shal- 
lowly furrowed. Shell soft. Flesh thin at the apex, solid at base 
and medial; texture fine, dry; sweet, well-flavored; color orange to 
reddish salmon; quality good. 

Seed small 300 per oz.-. dull grayish white with fuzzy, 
rough, yellowish brown margin. 

Cheese. Refs. 14, 19, 24, 28, 32, 33, 41, 42, 49, 50, 64, 
73, 125, 129, 130. Syns. Big Cheese, Buff Pie, 
Family, Finest Cheese, Finest Yellow Family, 
Landreth Cheese, Large Cheese, Large Cheese 
Western Sweet, Large Mammoth Yellow Cheese, 
Large Sweet Cheese, Mammoth Cheese, Sweet 
Pumpkin, Thanksgiving, Thanksgiving Pie, West 
India Pumpkin, Yellow Family. 
The name was apparently suggested because of the 

similarity in shape of the mature fruit to a cheese box. 



It is one of the oldest varieties cultivated in America, 
having been listed as early as 1824 by Thorburn, 1826 
by Sinclair and Moore, and in 1834 by Hovey. The 
cheese pumpkins are, as a group, quite different from 
other squash and pumpkins, and have remained remark- 
ably stable. The group as a whole is characterized by 
having flesh of a deep salmon orange color. The Cheese 
pumpkins are hardy, productive, and much superior to 
most of the field grown sorts. It is largely grown for 
canning cr stock feed and is well adapted to growing con- 
ditions as found in every part of the country. 

At Geneva this variety matured in 110 days, in 
season with Calhoun, and 15 days earlier than Kentucky 
Field. The vines are very much like those of Kentucky 
Field, have leaves which are marked with smaller gray 
blotches and have longer and more slender petioles. 
The fruits are slightly smaller and much more uniform 
in color, particularly in the early mature stages, and have 
more uniform and thicker flesh. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, very vigorous, 15-18 
feet long; branches moderately many, basal and medial. Cotyle- 
dons medium long and moderately narrow, 2}± x 1 ] _> inches; long 
oval to rectangular; apex notched, truncate; veining prominent; 
color distinctly grayish green. Leaves shallowly lobed, medium 
size, 9 x 11 inches, blades moderately decurrent; margin slightly 
incised at the base of the blade, otherwise denticulate, slightly 
frilled; color moderately dark green, moderately marked with small, 
pale grayish green blotches at intersection of vein and veinlets: 
petioles moderately long and slender, 16-18 inches. Flower — pistil- 
late, very large, 8 inches across, orange; ovary oblate, pale green, 
spotted with creamy white; sepals medium long and slender, 1 inch: 
— staminate, moderately large, 6—7 inches across; sepals moderately 
long, 1 ] 2 inches, leaf-like, flattened, distinctly pubescent; pedicle 
moderately long, 9-12 inches. 

Fruit medium size, 5' 2-6 x 12-14 inches: weight 10-14 pounds. 
Shape oblate, distinctly flattened and moderately depressed at 
base and apex; ribbed widely and furrowed shallowly; surface smooth. 
Blossom scar 3 _i-l inch in diameter, not prominent. Skin color 
dark cream icinnamon buff) network over the entire fruit, having a 
slightly lighter cream ground color cream color 1 within the mesh of 
the color pattern. Fruit stalk medium long, 3-3 ' 2 inches, curved, 
ridged, woody, tough and distinctly expanded at attachment. 
Shell medium thick, j\— } s inch and moderately soft. Flesh moder- 
ately thick at the base and medial, l'.j-l's inches, considerably 
thinner at apex, '21 inch; texture very coarse, fibrous, juicy, 
soft, tender; distinctly sweet; quality poor; color deep orange 
(zinc orange to salmon orange). Seed cavity large, contains much 
placental tissue which is moist, very fibrous and tough and difficult 
to remove. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short and medium broad, 
moderately flat, 1.55 x .85 x .25 cm. 244 per oz.): face slightly rough, 
light brown tilleul buff); margin distinct, wedge-like, fuzzy and 
dull brown (fawn color). 

Chirimen. Refs. 33, 73. Syn. Japanese Winter Squash. 
This moschata variety represents one of the most 
unique groups in the whole squash family in its fruit 
characters and habit of growth. When Aggeler 8b 
Musser Seed Co. of Los Angeles introduced it in 1922 
it was said to have been " popular with the Japanese 
ever since their advent into California gardening." The 
origin of the variety is unknown, although the fruits of 
the variety Yokohama introduced many years earlier 
have the same blister-like protuberances on the skin, an 
inference which may indicate close relationship. In 
California the variety has had limited use. It requires a 




5 



w 

w 

- 

o 




* 



^ne-ha)f natural siie) 



GREEN STRIPED CUSHAW 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



53 



long season and occasionally does not mature in New- 
York State. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 135 days, 
5 days earlier than Kikuza and Saikyo and 20 days 
later than Japanese Pie. The vines are similar to 
those of Saikyo and Kikuza except that the gray blotches 
on the leaves are more numerous than they are on 
the latter two sorts. The leaves are decidedly darker 
green than those of Japanese Pie and are distinctly 
more decurrent, more like those of Bugle Gramma in this 
respect. The fruits are most like those of Kikuza 
although smaller than that variety, much more warted, 
pimpled and more narrowly ribbed. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, dark green, very vigorous, 20-25 
feet: branches many, basal and medial. Cotyledons moderately 
short and moderately narrow, ! ! ,xl : , inches; oval; apex rounded, 
slightly notched; color moderately dark green. Leaves small, very 
shallowly lobed, distinctly decurrent; margin distinctly incised at 
the base, otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled; surface smooth and 
velvet-like; color very dark green moderately marked with small 
gray blotches along the veins and intersections with veinlets; petiole 
medium long, 15-16 inches; spines very many, medium long and 
very slender. Flower — pistillate, moderately large, 6'^-7 inches 
across, orange; ovary bowl-like, scalloped about the base; sepals 
long and moderately heavy, l 3 ±-2 inches, with moderately large 
leaf-like appendages; — staminate, medium large, 5 '2— 6 inches 
across: sepals % r ery long and heavy, 2 inches, with leaf -like append- 
ages; pedicle very long, 12-14 inches. 

Fruit small, 5—6 x 8-10 inches; weight 8—10 pounds. Shape 
oblate, deeply depressed at base, moderately so at the apex; ribbed 
narrowly; furrowed very deeply; surface rough, profusely and finely 
warted. Skin color dull bronze-orange crange cinnamon 1 having a 
very heavy bloom. Fruit stalk medium long and medium heavy, 
3-4 inches, curved, slightly ribbed, woody and tough, distinctly 
expanded at the base. Shell moderately hard and medium thick, 
. inch. Flesh thick to very thick at medial and base, l 1 j-2 ] 2 
inches, considerably thinner at apex; texture moderately coarse, 
fibrous, slightly moist: flavor lacking, moderately sweet; quality 
poor; color variable, yellow to orange blend buff yellow to light 
orange yellow . Seed cavity very small, nearest the apex; placental 
tissue abundant, moist, tough, difficult to remove, considerably 
deeper orange than the flesh. 

Seed small, medium long, narrow and moderately flat, 1.3 x 
.60 x .26 cm.: very light 500 per oz. ; face moderately smooth, 
somewhat scaly, dull white cartridge buff ; margin rounded, 
slightly fuzzy vinaceous buff . 

Golden Cushaw. Refs. 14, 24, 33, 41, 44, 50, 59, 73, 
89, 90, 115, 129. 130. Syns. Cashaw, Cashew, 
Cushaw, Cushaw Crookneck, Golden Yellow, 
Large Yellow Crookneck, Mammoth Golden 
Crookneck, Mammoth Golden Cushaw 7 , Yellow 
Cashaw% Yellow Winter Crookneck. 
The origin of this variety, which today is the most 
important of its group, remains unknown. It is one of 
the few pumpkins or squashes which is unsuited, because 
of too short a growing season, to northern cultivation. 
Burr in 1893 in writing of Cashew says: " It is not culti- 
vated or generally known in New England or in the 
northern portions of the United States; for though well 
suited to Louisiana and other portions of the South, where 
it is much esteemed, it is evidently too tender for cultiva- 
tion where the seasons are comparatively short and cool." 
Goff in 1884 also found that the Cashew pumpkins would 
probably mature only in the most favorable seasons. 



This group of varieties with fruits which resemble in 
shape some of the " Calebasses " of Peru or the West 
Indies is considered as fine table pumpkins in the South. 
In early catalogs the use of the name Cushaw did not 
always refer to the same variety. It is a question as 
to which of the forms was the best known but it appears 
that the golden fruited strains produced fruits more 
slender than the white and green striped kinds. 

Mature fruits were obtained at Geneva in 125 days, 
5 days later than Green Striped and White Cushaw and 
10 days later than Japanese Pie. The vines are similar 
in vigor to those of Green Striped Cushaw but have 
leaves which are blotched with larger gray areas and 
have flowers with much longer and broader sepals. The 
fruits are larger, have a thicker and longer neck and a 
more abruptly bulbous apex than Green Striped Cushaw. 
The fruit stalks are distinctly more slender, more curved 
and tougher than those of Green Striped Cushaw or 
White Cushaw. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, rather dark green, 
moderately vigorous, 12-15 feet; branches many, basal and medial. 
Cotyledons moderately short and moderately narrow, 2 :! g x 1 ' 4 
inches, long oval; apex moderately rounded; color mottled dark 
grayish green. Leaves moderately small, 10 x 14 inches, very 
shallowly 5 -lobed: decurrent; margin slightly incised at the base, 
otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled; color medium green, rather 
sparsely marked with moderately large gray blotches at the inter- 
sections of the veins and veinlets; petiole medium long and moder- 
ately heavy, 14—16 inches. Flower — pistillate, large, 7 inches 
across, orange; ovary crooknecked; apex abruptly enlarged, light 
green in color; sepals long and broad, i-%—2 inches, having leaf-like 
appendages; pedicle short, 5-6 inches; — staminate, smaller, 6 inches. 

Fruit moderately large, 18-24 inches long, 8-9 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 4—5 inches at the medial and base; weight 
10-14 pounds. Shape, medial and base a curved cylinder, apex 
distinctly bulbous; ribbed widely, most prominent at the bulbous 
apex and extreme base: furrows shallow; surface smooth; blossom 
scar prominent, blackened, J£— 1 inch in diameter. Skin color deep 
cream cinnamon buff; over the entire surface, bloom prominent. 
Fruit stalk moderately short and medium heavy, 2 ' 2-3 inches, very 
slightly curved, woody and tough, moderately furrowed, expanded 
at the base. Shell moderately soft, moderately thin, yj- 1 g inch. 
Flesh medium thick, 1—1 3 4 inches at the apex, medial and base solid, 
texture coarse and granular, very coarse and fibrous; color pale 
salmon 1 capucine orange) ; quality poor. Seed cavity only at apex, 
moderately small; placental tissue much, moist, very fibrous, cord- 
like, and tough, difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately narrow and 
moderately flat, 1.70 x .87 x .24 cm. (240 per oz. I; face slightly 
scaly, dull buff tilleul buff,); margin distinct, wedge-like, brown 
fawn color). 

Green Striped Cushaw. Refs. 14, 19, 24, 25, 26, 33, 

34, 41, 50, 52, 59, 61, 64, 67, 73, 101, 124, 129, 
130, 132, 136. Syns. Brother Jonathan, Green 
Crookneck Winter, Improved Cushaw, Improved 
Green Striped Cushaw, Improved Winter Crook- 
neck, Large Winter Crookneck, Maryland Sweet 
Potato, New Jersey Sweet Potato, Pie Melon, 
Striped Cushaw, Striped Crookneck. 
The Green Striped Cushaw when first introduced 
was known as the Improved Cushaw. The early records 
and published descriptions of the " Crane-neck " squash 
tend to show that the cream -colored or light yellow skin 
antedated the striped forms. Burr in 1893 describes 



54 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



the Puritan, which produced a white or creamy white 
fruit marked and striped with green. This was similar 
to the markings of Tennessee Sweet Potato. It is quite 
probable that the striped form of the Cushaw was one 
of the native varieties of the West Indies but that it 
became a cultivated form after the development of 
Golden Cushaw. In present day catalogs this is the one 
most generally listed. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 120 days, 
5 days earlier than Golden Cushaw, in season with White 
Cushaw and 5 days later than Japanese Pie. The vines 
are similar in vigor to those of White Cushaw and 
Golden Cushaw, but the leaves have smaller and more 
numerous gray blotches and have flowers with much 
shorter and narrower sepals. The fruits are smaller, 
have a more slender, shorter and more curved neck, 
and a larger, more gradually tapering, bulbous apex 
than Golden Cushaw. The fruit stalks are more like 
those of maximas, being decidedly heavier, much shorter, 
straighter and more spongy than those of Golden Cushaw. 

Plant trailing; vines very coarse and heavy, moderately dark 
green, moderately vigorous, 12-15 feet; branches very few, medial. 
Cotyledons medium long and medium broad, 2Yi x 1/8 inches, long 
oval; apex tapered; veining very prominent; color mottled dark 
grayish green. Leaves medium large, 10 x 15 inches, shallowly 
5-lobed; decurrent; margin incised at the base, otherwise denticu- 
late, frilled; surface slightly blistered; color moderately dark green, 
sparsely marked with small gray blotches at intersections of veins 
and veinlets; petiole moderately long and heavy, 15-18 inches. 
Flower — pistillate, large, 7 inches across, with very much curved 
and crumpled margins, orange; ovary crooknecked with enlarged 
apex, pale green mottled and streaked with pale yellow; sepals short 
and very slender, 1 j- 3 4 inch; — staminate, moderately large, 6 1 £-7 
inches across, with margins of petals distinctly curved and crumpled; 
sepals medium long and medium heavy, 1 inch; pedicle short, 5—6 
inches. 

Fruit medium large, 16-20 inches long, 8-10 inches in diameter 
at the apex and 4—5 inches at the base; weight 12-16 pounds. Shape 
crookneck, decidedly curved at the base, abruptly enlarged at the 
apex; surface smooth; blossom scar i 2~ 3 4 inch in diameter. Skin 
color very pale cream (ivory yellow) striped with a coarse, lace-like, 
dark green dark dull yellow green) color pattern, extending length- 
wise of the fruit in bands about two inches broad. Fruit stalk 
moderately short and thick, 2 x IJ4 inches, nearly round, rather 
spongy and soft. Shell moderately soft, thin at the apex, rj inch, 
much thicker at the base and medial. Flesh medium thick, 1 inch 
at the apex, solid at the base; texture coarse and fibrous, tough, 
moist; pale cream (maize yellow) color; slightly sweet, quality poor. 
Seed cavity large, at apex; placental tissue abundant, rather moist, 
fibrous, often chunky, difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately narrow and 
medium plump, 1.9 x 1.05 x .35 cm. (128 per oz.); face rough and 
wrinkled, often pitted, white; margin wedge-like, fuzzy, buff (vin- 
aceous buff) in color. 

Japanese Pie. Refs. 14, 27, 31, 33, 41, 45, 61, 63, 64, 

73, 129, 130. Syns. Chinese Alphabet, Green 

Cushaw, Japan Crookneck, Japan Pie, Japanese, 

Japanese Alphabet, Japanese Crookneck, Japanese 

Pumpkin, New Japanese, Nippon Island. 

With the statement, " This excellent new variety of 

pumpkin comes from Japan " Samuel Wilson, Mechanics- 

ville, Pennsylvania, introduced in 1884 what he called 

Japanese Pumpkin. Its use spread rather rapidly for it 

had several characteristics which were well suited to 

advertising. One of these, a seed character, strangely 



enough had little to do with either the suitability, pro- 
lificacy, or quality of the variety. The seeds, " curiously 
marked or sculptured in the manner of Chinese letters," 
led to the name Chinese or Japanese Alphabet Squash and 
because of this the variety was widely grown as a novelty. 
In 1890 Gregory described it as " closely resembling the 
old-fashioned Crookneck of the North and the Cashaw 
of the South; but differs from the former in having a 
fleshy stem and from the latter in the peculiar marking 
of its seed and from each in being superior in quality." 
Its chief use has been for canning and as food for stock. 
At Geneva this variety matured in 115 days, 5 days 
earlier than Green Striped Cushaw, and 5 days later 
than Tennessee Sweet Potato and Cheese. The vines 
are slightly less vigorous than those of Green Striped 
Cushaw, have slightly smaller leaves which are distinctly 
lighter green and marked with larger gray blotches. 
The flowers are much smaller, more prominently veined, 
and the petal margins are more recurved. The fruits 
are much darker green, less curved, and have a larger, 
thicker fruit stalk. The surface of the seeds is distinctly 
more cracked and pitted than those of any other variety. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, very dark green, 
moderately vigorous, 10-12 feet; branches medium number, basal 
and medial. Cotyledons medium long and medium broad, spoon- 
like, apex rounded; veining prominent; color moderately light green. 
Leaves moderately small, 11 x 13 inches, broadly 5-lobed; decurrent; 
sinuses very narrow, acute; margin slightly incised at the base, 
otherwise denticulate; surface smooth; color moderately light green, 
profusely and distinctly marked with medium large, light gray 
blotches at the intersections of veins and veinlets; petiole medium 
long and slender, 12-15 inches; spines very few, short and slender. 
Flower — pistillate, moderately small, 4. 1 o-5 inches across, orange; 
margins of petals recurved, distinctly undulate, veins green, very 
prominent; ovary long pyriform; sepals very short and moderately 
heavy, '4 inch; — staminate, moderately small, 4'_.-5 inches across, 
petals same as pistillate; sepals short, moderately broad and slightly 
flattened, 5 s inch; pedicle short, 5-6 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 15-18 inches long, 7-9 inches in diameter 
at the apex and 4-5 inches at the base and medial; weight 10-14 
pounds. Shape, base and medial a moderately curved cylinder, 
apex abruptly enlarged, bulbous; surface nearly smooth at the 
bulbous tip, with base and medial rough, heavily corked and cor- 
rugated; blossom scar with button, very slightly extended. Skin 
color consists of alternating very dark (dull blackish green) and 
moderately dark green i Varley's green ) lace-like stripes through the 
mesh of which appears a light green (deep turtle green); often 
obscure differentiation. Fruit stalk moderately short and very 
thick, 2-2 J 2 x l 3 4-2 inches, nearly round, straight, soft and corky. 
Shell moderately soft and medium thick, ' y inch. Flesh moderately 
thin at the apex, 3 i-l inch, solid at the base and medial; texture 
moderately coarse, slightly fibrous, juicy; slightly sweet, yellow 
(buff yellow); quality poor. Seed cavity medium small, at apex; 
placental tissue abundant, moist, tender, rather easily removed. 

Seed medium large; medium long and broad, moderately 
plump, 1.85 x 1.04 x .45 cm. (136 per oz.); face rough, distinctly 
creased and pitted, itilleu! buff); margin distinctly wedge-like, 
fuzzy (pinkish buff). 

Kentucky Field. Refs. 33, 73, 130. Syns. Indiana 

Cornfield, Indiana Field, Kentucky Large Field, 

Kentucky Mammoth, Large Yellow Kentucky 

Field, Mammoth Kentucky Field, Sweet Cheese. 

By many Kentucky Field is considered identical to 

Cheese. The two varieties are quite similar and it is 

probable that Kentucky Field was selected from Cheese 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



55 



and that its individuality, in many instances, has not been 
maintained. The name itself is popular and in time 
may become the accepted name for the group. 

Maturity was attained at Geneva in 125 days, 15 
days later than Cheese and 5 days later than Calhoun. 
The vines are much like those of Cheese, but have leaves 
which are marked with larger gray blotches and shorter 
and heavier petioles. The fruits are slightly larger and 
much more variable in shape and color pattern. After 
storage both varieties have much the same color. 

Plant trailing; vines slender, medium green, vigorous, 15-18 
feet; branches moderately many, basal and media!. Cotyledons 
medium long and medium broad, 2 x l^s inches, long oval; apex 
rounded; veining moderately prominent; color grayish green. 
Leaves small, 9 x 13 inches, shallowly 5-lobed; decurrent; margin 
slightly incised at the base, otherwise denticulate, very slightly 
frilled; surface smooth; color moderately dark green, marked with 
moderately large gray blotches at the intersections of veins and 
veinlets and occasionally along the veins; petiole medium long, 
14-16 inches. Flower — pistillate, very large, 8 inches across, 
orange; ovary nearly globular, pale green, spotted with creamy white; 
sepals very short and slender, 3 s inch; — staminate large, 7 ' 'i inches 
across, sepals moderately long and broad, 1 } o inches, leaf-like; 
pedicle moderately long 9-10 ii.ches. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-7 x 12-15 inches; weight 12-16 
pounds. Shape oblate, distinctly flattened, base and apex moder- 
ately depressed; ribbed widely; furrows moderately shallow; sur- 
face smooth, slightly wrinkled, leathery; blossom scar large, 1-1 '.i 
inches in diameter, prominent, blackened and checked blossom 
remains present. Skin color in the early mature stage consists 
of a moderately regular lace -like pattern of various shades of 
green depending upon the age of the fruit, during storage these 
are replaced by deep cream (cinnamon buff). Fruit stalk medium 
long, 3-3 ' 2 inches, slightly curved, rough, shallowly furrowed, 
woody and tough, decidedly expanded at the base. Shell soft 
and medium thick, '$ inch (warm buff). Flesh moderately thin, 
:! 4-l inch; texture very coarse and fibrous, juicy and moderately 
tough; slightly sweet, dull salmon orange (capucine orange); quality 
poor. Seed cavity large; placental tissue abundant, moist, tough 
and very fibrous, cord-like, very difficult to remove. 

Seed small; short, broad and moderately flat, 1.37 x .86 x .26 
cm. (276 per oz. !; face rather rough and slightly wrinkled, buff 
tilleul buff j ; margin wedge-like, fuzzy, brown (fawn color). 

Kikuza. Syn. Sweet Kikuza. 

Very similar to Chirimen in character of skin and 
surface of the fruit, this variety of Japanese origin was 
offered by the Oriental Seed Co. of San Francisco in 1927. 

Mature fruits were produced in 140 days, in season 
with Saikyo, 5 days later than Chirimen and 25 days 
later than Japanese Pie. The fruits are thicker and 
broader than those of Chirimen, and much less wrinkled 
and warted, also more broadly ribbed and more shallowly 
furrowed. 

Plant trailing; vine and foliage characters practically the same 
as those of Chirimen except that the gray blotches on the foliage 
are less numerous. Flower — pistillate, large, 7 '2-8 inches across, 
orange; corolla very soft and velvet -like; corolla tube heavily pubes- 
cent with long hairs; stigma nearly compact, greenish yellow in color; 
ovary umbraculiform, slightly furrowed; sepals very long and 
moderately heavy, 2-2 • ( inches, with large distinct leaf-like append- 
ages; — staminate, moderately large, 6 inches across; sepals medium 
long and broad, 1 ' 1 1 ' _• inches, occasionally with small leaf-like 
appendages; pedicle long, 10-14 inches. 

Fruit small, 5-6 x 9-10 inches; weight 5-8 pounds. Shape 
somewhat drumlike, deeply depressed at the base and moderately 
at the apex; ribbed moderately narrow; furrows moderately deep; 
surface rough, warted and wrinkled; skin color is dull bronze orange 



i orange cinnamon I, bloom abundant. Fruit stalk medium long 
and medium heavy, 3 4 inches, slightly curved, round, smooth, 
woody and tough, distinctly expanded at the base. Shell moder- 
ately hard, medium thick, ' * inch. Flesh variable in thickness, 
1 1 ' j inches at the base; texture fine, moderately dry, tender, 
crisp; sweet, rather spicy flavor; color deep yellow ideep chrome) 
somewhat less intense near the shell; quality fair; seed cavity small, 
in center; placental tissue little, rather moist, tender and easily 
removed. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, moderately broad 
and flat, rather long-necked, 1.46 x .86 x .20 cm. (352 per oz.); face 
moderately smooth, dull white (cartridge buff); margin slightly 
ridged, pale buff (vinaceous buff), slightly fuzzy. 

Neapolitan. Refs. 24, 48, 49, 75, 97, 101, 137. Syns. 

Carpet-bag Gourd, Long Naples, Long Naples 

Green Not Ribbed, Long Neapolitan, Naples 

Giant. 

This was described by Burr in 1863 but was not 

generally cataloged in this country. From time to 

time it was listed as a novelty; one of the last so noted 

being that of the Iowa Seed Co. in 1906. The peculiar 

shape of the fruits is responsible for the use of the name 

Carpet-bag Gourd. A smaller fruited strain, Early 

Neapolitan (Early Carpet-bag), was listed by Thorburn 

in 1906; this was also noted by Robinson who says, 

" It is much earlier than the giant form." 

This variety was similar to White Portmanteau in 
shape, being somewhat more enlarged at the apex and 
having a more buff -yellow skin color at full maturity. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, moderately vigorous, 
10-15 feet; leaves medium large, very shallowly lobed, tapered at 
the apex; color dull green marked with gray blotches along the 
veins and veinlets; margin slightly sinuate and undulate. 

Fruit medium large, 16-20 inches long, 5-8 inches in diameter 
at the apex and 4-5 inches at the base and medial. Shape slightly 
curved, slightly enlarged or swollen at the apex; ribbed broadly; 
furrowed very shallow, obscurely. Surface moderately smooth. 
Skin color bright green, at full maturity becoming dull yellow. 
Flesh moderately thin at the apex, solid at the base and medial; 
color bright yellow. 

Seeds few, located in the apex only, dull white in color. 

Puritan. Ref. 24. 

Burr in 1863 mentions this variety as " long common 
to the gardens in the vicinity of the Old Colony." This 
places its early use in Massachusetts. However, it 
apparently was not listed in catalogs after the varieties 
of better quality were known. From the description of 
the fruits it was a variety quite similar to Tennessee 
Sweet Potato. 

Quaker Pit-. Refs. 14, 28, 32, 33, 64, 73, 129, 130. 

Quaker Pie is very similar to the Cheese Pumpkins 
in color and smoothness of the skin but differs in shape. 
It is quite probable that the variety was a selection from 
Cheese. W. Atlee Burpee 85 Co., having secured seed 
from a family of Quakers in Washington County, New 
York, introduced this variety in their 1888 seed catalog. 
This moschata has never been widely used but has 
found favor in some sections because of its uniformity. 

The variety matured in 120 days at Geneva, 10 days 
later than Cheese and 5 days earlier than Virginia 
Mammoth. The vines are considerably less vigorous 



56 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



than those of Virginia Mammoth, have smaller leaves 
and have flowers which are slightly larger with smaller 
sepals. The fruits are similar in color but those of 
Quaker Pie are shorter and more pyriform in shape. 

Plant trailing: vines slender, medium green, occasionally very 
dark green, vigorous, 15-18 feet: branches many, basal and medial. 
Cotyledons moderately short and narrow, 2 1 , x l 1 , inches, oval: 
apex moderately tapered: color moderately light grayish green. 
Leaves small, 9 x 12 inches, shallowly 5-lobed: decurrent; margin 
slightly incised at the base, otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled: 
surface smooth; color dark green profusely marked with moder- 
ately large gray blotches along the veins and at intersections: 
petiole medium long and moderately slender, 14—16 inches. Flower 
— pistillate, very large, 8 inches across, orange; ovary fusiform; 
sepals moderately short and broad, :i 4 inch, somewhat leaf-like; — 
staminate, medium large, 5-6 inches across; sepals medium long, 
l'l inches, leaf-like, expanded at the tip; pedicle moderately long, 
9-10 inches. 

Fruit moderately small, 10-12 x 8-9 inches; weight 10-12 
pounds. Shape pyriform, often thickened at the neck, slightly 
depressed at base and apex; ribbed moderately narrow; furrows very 
shallow; surface smooth; blossom scar inconspicuous. Skin color 
consists of a dark cream (cinnamon buff) lace-like pattern over 
the entire surface, through the mesh of which a ground color of 
paler cream pale ochraceous buff) is evident. Fruit stalk medium 
long and thick, 3—4 inches, curved, slightly furrowed, woody 
and tough, distinctly expanded at the base. Shell moderately 
soft and moderately thick, } *,— y<; inch. Flesh moderately thick, 
1 ! 4 inches, slightly thicker at the base; texture coarse, fibrous, 
particularly the innermost layer, moist, rather tough, insipid, 
pale orange (capucine orange ; quality poor. Seed cavity large; 
placental tissue abundant, very moist, tough and fibrous, very 
difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long, moderately narrow and 
medium plump, 1.8 x .96 x 31 cm. (184 per oz. I; face slightly rough, 
dull yellowish brown (tilleul buff); margin wedge-like, crinkled and 
moderately fuzzy, light brown (fawn). 

Saikyo. 

This is a variety of Japanese origin listed by the 
Oriental Seed Co. of San Francisco in 1927. In shape 
it is quite unlike other squashes the fruits resembling a 
jug with a large base. 

At Geneva this variety matured its fruit in 140 days, 
in season with Kikuza, 5 days later than Chirimen and 
25 days later than Japanese Pie. The flowers are 
slightly smaller than those of Kikuza and have bell- 
like ovaries with the stigma more expanded. The fruits 
are much larger, distinct in shape, and similar in surface 
character to those of Kikuza. 

Plant trailing; vines and foliage very much the same as Chiri- 
men. Flower — pistillate, large, 7 inches across, orange; ovary 
somewhat bell-like, constricted near the base; sepals long and 
decidedly leaf -like, l';>-2 inches; — staminate, moderately small, 
4 1 _. 5 inches across; petals slightly recurved and frilled; veins very 
prominent, dark green: stigma velvet-like, yellowish green, slightly 
expanded; sepals very long and broad, 2-2 ] 4 inches, small leaf-like 
appendages present; pedicle very long, 12-14 inches. 

Fruit moderately small; 9-10 inches long, 10—12 inches in 
diameter near the apex and 8-10 inches near the base; weight 10-12 
pounds. Shape bell-like moderately constricted near the base: 
ribbed moderately narrow: furrows moderately deep: surface rough 
and wrinkled, warted and often profusely marked with small blister- 
like eruptions; blossom scar depressed. Skin color develops very 
late, changes from idark greenish black) to zinc orange to tawny) 

.^set : marked with a very heavy bloom in the later stages. Fruit 
stalk moderately short and heavy, 2-3 inches, curved, moderately 
furrowed, woody and tough, distinctly expanded at the base. 



Shell moderately hard and thin, rg inch. Flesh moderately thick, 
1*4 inch at the base, otherwise about 1 inch; texture moderately 
coarse, somewhat fibrous, moderately moist; rather sweet; color 
light yellow (light cadmium); quality fair. Seed cavity moderately 
small, conforms to fruit shape; placental tissue moderately little, 
orange color, dry, somewhat fibrous, easily removed. 

Seed moderately small; moderately short, medium broad and 
moderately flat, 1.68 x .96 x .29 cm. (288 per oz. ; face moderately 
smooth, slightly scaly, dull white (cartridge buff) ; margin moderately 
rounded, slightly fuzzy, buff tvinaceous buff). 

Seminole. 

This tropical pumpkin has been grown in Florida 
for hundreds of years and occasionally has been offered 
in seed lists. Aggeler & Musser of Los Angeles in 1916 
featured it as a most promising sort, with a photograph 
which showed the fruits as bell shaped. The name comes 
from the Seminole Indian tribe from whom the original 
seed was secured. 

Tennessee Sweet Potato. Refs. 14, 26. 33, 40, 41, 61, 
73, 82. 106. 129, 130. Syns. Genesee Sweet 
Potato. Green Striped Bell, Sweet Potato, Tennes- 
see, Virginia Sweet Potato. 

The catalogs of Thorbum in 1847 and in 1856 offered 
a variety under the name Green Striped Bell. While a 
good description of this is not available it would seem 
that it might have been the original of the variety herein 
described. It has its counterpart for shape in the 
Puritan Squash described by Burr in 1863. The first 
use of the name Tennessee Sweet Potato in available 
literature is found in the 1883 catalog of W. Atlee Burpee 
8e Co. Some of the characters which have been respon- 
sible for its extensive use in the South are its long keeping 
qualities, its thick dry fine-grained flesh, and its excellent 
flavor. This is one of the thick, fleshy stemmed 
moschatas. 

Mature fruits were produced at Geneva in 110 days, 
5 days earlier than Japanese Pie and in season with 
Cheese and Calhoun. The vines are considerably more 
vigorous than those of Japanese Pie. have leaves which 
are decidedly darker green and much more sparsely 
blotched with gray. The flowers are larger and some- 
what less ruffled, while the fruits are much lighter in 
color but have very similar fruit stalks. 

Plant trailing: vines coarse, vigorous, 15-18 feet; branches 
moderately many, basal and medial. Cotyledons medium long 
and moderately broad, 2 : . x 1' 4 inches, broad oval: apex tapered: 
veining prominent; color dark green, somewhat mottled. Leaves 
medium large, 10 x 15 inches, shallowly 5-lobed; decurrent: margin 
slightly incised at the base, otherwise denticulate, slightly frilled, 
surface somewhat blistered; color very dark green, sparsely marked 
with small, light gray blotches at the intersections of veins and 
veinlets; petiole medium long and moderately heavy, 14-16 inches; 
spines very few. short and slender. Flower — pistillate, moderately 
large. 6-7 inches across, orange; petals with margins somewhat 
recurved and shallowly frilled: ovary club-like, gradually tapering 
from the base to a much swollen apex; sepals very short and moder- 
ately slender, 3 y inch; — staminate, medium large, 5 inches across, 
petals recurved and shallowly frilled: sepals moderately short, 
broad and moderately thick. 3 i inch; pedicle medium long, 8-9 inches. 

Fruit medium large, 12-15 inches long, 9-10 inches in diameter 
at the apex and 4 1 _>-5 inches at the base; weight 12-15 pounds. 
Shape pyriform; surface smooth: blossom scar ''4 inch in diameter. 
Skin color pale yellow ivory yellow , rather uniformly marked with 
broad longitudinal greenish yellow idull green yellow' lace-like 




TENNESSEE SWEET POTATO 



(Two-thirds natural size 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



57 



stripes, changing to yellow 'mustard yellow) during storage. Fruit 
stalk short and very thick. 1 ' _■ . x 1 ' _■ 1 ; , inches, round, straight, 
soft and corky. Shell medium thick. \ ^ inch, very hard, pale yellow 
margarite yellow 1 . Flesh moderately thin at apex and medial, 
base 3' j 4 inches, nearly solid; texture coarse, granular, moderately 
firm, rather moist; moderately sweet, light yellow ^maize yellow); 
quality poor. Seed cavity large, conforms to fruit shape; placental 
tissue abundant, rather moist, very fibrous, difficult to remove. 

Seed moderately large; moderately long, moderately narrow 
and plump, 2.0 x 1.04 x .47 cm. ^124 per oz. ; face moderately 
rough, pitted and creased, glossy white; margin sharp wedge-like, 
buff ^vinaceous buff), moderately fuzzy. 

Virginia Mammoth. 

This is one of the pumpkins recommended for use 
in the South. It is apparently an old variety for it is 
listed in the 1895 catalog of T. W. Wood 8c Sons of 
Richmond, Virginia, and has been carried continuously 
since. 

Virginia Mammoth matured at Geneva in 125 days, 
15 days earlier than Chirimen, in season with Kentucky 
Field, and 5 days later than Quaker Pie. The vines are 
more vigorous than those of Quaker Pie and have larger, 
more frilled leaves, while the flowers have longer and 
distinctly broader sepals. The fruits are much larger 
and longer than those of Quaker Pie but have much the 
same skin color. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately coarse, rather dark green, 
very vigorous, 18—25 feet; branches many, basal and medial. Coty- 
ledons moderately short and medium broad, 2 J s x 1 ' ■_> inches, broad 
oval; apex rounded, slightly notched, veining prominent; color 
grayish green. Leaves medium large, 11 x 15 inches, shallowly 
5-lobed, decurrent: margin denticulate, distinctly frilled; surface 
smooth, color moderately dark green, profusely marked with large 
grayish blotches at the intersections and very often along the veins; 
petiole medium long and medium heavy, 15-16 inches. Flower — 
pistillate, large, 7-7 >_> inches across, orange; ovary fusiform, pale 
green, mottled and spotted with pale yellow; sepals long and very 
broad, 1 3 4 inches, distinctly leaf-like at the apex; — staminate, 
moderately large, 6-6 J z inches; petals distinctly frilled and crumpled; 
sepals long and very broad at apex, 1% inches, leaf-like appendage; 
pedicle very long, 12—14 inches. 

Fruit medium large, 14-16 x 10—12 inches; weight 24-26 
pounds. Shape oblong, slightly and usually irregularly tapering 
from the medial towards both ends; base and apex slightly depressed; 
ribbed widely; furrows shallow; surface smooth; blossom scar promi- 
nent, 3 4 -l inch in diameter, depressed, blackened and checked. 
Skin color consists of a dark buff cinnamon buff) lace-like color 
pattern over the entire fruit, through the mesh of which shows a 
lighter shade of buff pale ochraceous buff). Fruit stalk medium 
long and moderately heavy, 3-4 inches, curved, moderately fur- 
rowed, woody and tough, decidedly expanded at the base. Shell 
moderately soft, variable in thickness, > g- '■'■ , inch. Flesh thick, 
1 .2 inches, thickest at the base and apex, moderately coarse, 
inner layers much more fibrous than outer ones, moist, insipid, 
color variable, some with pale salmon orange (capucine orange), 
others pale amber; quality poor. Seed cavity large, conforms to 
fruit shape; placental tissue much, moist, tough, very fibrous, 
very difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long and broad, moderately flat, 
1.9 x 1.12 x .25 cm. (176 per oz.); face moderately rough and scaly, 
buff (tilleul buffj; margin rounded, slightly swollen and fuzzy, 
brown fawn). 

White Cushaw. Refs. 14, 31, 33, 73, 129, 130. Syns. 
Improved White Cashaw, Jonathan, Large White 
Cushaw, Mammoth White Cashaw, New Jona- 
than, Trombone, White Crookneck, White Winter 
Crookneck. 



Under the name Jonathan this was offered as early 
as 1891 by Livingston and in 1893 by Johnson & Stokes 
of Philadelphia. Inasmuch as the fruits have no particu- 
lar merit over the Green Striped the variety has never 
been widely used but has remained in trade lists until 
recent years. 

Maturity was obtained at Geneva in 120 days, 5 days 
earlier than Golden Cushaw and in season with Green 
Striped Cushaw. The fruits are similar to those of 
Green Striped Cushaw except in color, and have a 
shorter, more slender neck. 

Plant trailing; vines, foliage and flowers much the same as 
those of Green Striped Cushaw. 

Fruit medium large, 18-20 inches long, 8-y inches in diameter 
at the medial and 4-5 inches at the base; weight 12-16 pounds. 
Shape crookneck with a distinctly swollen apex; surface smooth; 
blossom scar 3 4 inch in diameter, often slightly depressed. Skin 
color nearly white i margarite yellow) over the entire surface. Fruit 
stalk moderately short and thick, 2-3 x 1-1 ! 4 inches, slightly curved, 
slightly furrowed, woody and rather tough. Shell moderately soft 
and medium thick, J s - tj inch. Flesh moderately thin at medial 
and apex 3 4 — 1 inch, solid at the base; texture coarse, rather stringy 
along the inner portion, moist, moderately tender; insipid (cream 
color | ; quality poor. Seed cavity at apex; placental tissue abundant, 
tough, difficult to remove. 

Seed medium large; medium long and broad and medium flat, 
1.86 x 1.1 x .33 cm. 152 per oz. I; face finely wrinkled, glossy white; 
margin wedge-like, moderately fuzzy, buff (vinaceous buff). 

White Portmanteau. Refs. 48, 137. Syn. Porte- 
manteau. 

From the description given by Goff in 1884 this 
appears to have been a variety with fruits similar in 
shape to Neapolitan but with a white skin. It is also 
listed in Vilmorin with the added confirmation that the 
vegetative characters are also similar to that variety. 

The fruits are individual in shape and may be likened 
to the neck-like solid portion of Golden Cushaw, lacking 
the curve and the abrupt swollen apex of that variety. 
The literature disagrees as to its species, but herbarium 
specimens available serve as the basis for including it 
among the moschata varieties. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, very dark green near 
the base, vigorous; leaves large, nearly entire, dark green, profusely 
marked with grayish blotches at the junction of veins and veinlets; 
margin denticulate; petiole slender. 

Fruit large; 24-26 x 7-8 inches. Shape cylindrical, somewhat 
swollen near the apex; ribs obscure; furrows very shallow, surface 
very smooth; skin color nearly white. 

Winter Crookneck. Refs. 24, 50, 59, 64, 130. 

This variety differs from that of Canada Crookneck 
in being considerably larger; from that of Green Striped 
Cushaw in being either solid dark green or cream; and 
from the cushaws as a group in having a considerable 
number of nearly straight fruits. 

Plant trailing; vines vigorous; leaves moderately lobed, dark 
green blotched with gray; petioles slender and very dark green. 

Fruit variable in size, usually 18-20 inches long, 6-8 inches in 
diameter at the apex and 3^1 inches at the medial and base: shape 
variable, usually crookneck, otten nearly straight, decidedly and 
abruptly swollen at the apex. Skin color green or cream, often 
changing during storage to a paler green or reddish cream. 
Extremely variable in flesh, usually salmon yellow in color. 



58 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Yokohama. Refs. 4, 5, 11, 14, 26, 50, 59, 67, 71, 82, 
101, 126, 132, 137. 
Mr. Thomas Hogg of New York visited Japan in 
1862 and found a number of interesting cultivated 
plants. He sent home to his brother James Hogg a 
variety of seeds and among them were the seeds of a 
squash. These were planted, made vigorous growth, 
and produced fruits quite unlike any other squash yet 
grown in this country. It was natural that the name 
Yokohama should be given to this variety. There have 
been a number of other sorts introduced from Japan, 



but none have shown characteristics suitable for use as 
a vegetable by our people. This variety is practically 
the same as Chirimen and probably was the progenitor 
of the present-day variety. 

Plant trailing; vines moderately slender, vigorous, very dark 
green. Leaves moderately small, shallowly lobed, bluntly pointed 
at the apex, very deep dull green, profusely blotched with gray. 

Fruit small; 5-6 x 8-10 inches; shape distinctly oblate, 
depressed at base and apex; ribbed distinctly and narrowly; fur- 
rowed deeply and narrowly; surface profusely covered with small 
blister-like protuberances. Shell hard and woody; skin color very 
dark green, later turning to light brown. Flesh thick, fine texture, 
sweet, flavor good, color lemon yellow. Quality moderately good. 



SUPPLEMENTARY LIST OF OBSCURE VARIETIES 



The names given below represent varieties which 
can be considered of minor importance and about which 
little information is available; varieties which were in 
existence for a very short period; or varieties the seed of 



Varieties 



of 



Cucurbita 



maxima 



Adam's Favorite. Ref. 125. 
Apple Skin Hubbard. Syn. 

Sweet Potato. Refs. 14, 24, 

56. 
Banquet. 

Bertram. Ref. 21. 
Blight Resistant. 
Bolton. Ref. 11. 
Chinese. Ref. 130. 
Eureka. Syn. New Eureka. 

Refs. 17, 27, 47, 115, 130. 
Flat Top Pie. 

Golden Imperial. Ref. 125. 
Gray Mammoth. Ref. 31. 
Green Spanish. 
Guesman. Ref. 38. 
Handford's Cream. Ref. 125. 
Iowa Standard. 
Ironclad. Refs. 33, 41, 73, 

129. 
Large Bronze Montlhery . 

Ref. 101. 
Large Green. Ref. 101. 
Large Sugar. Ref. 37. 
Large White. Ref. 137. 
Lee's Mammoth. 
Mammoth French. Refs. 14, 

130. 



Mammoth Leghorn. Ref. 3. 
Mammoth Summit. Ref. 130. 
Mammoth White. 
Mission. Ref. 101. 
Nicaise. Ref. 101. 
Noxall. 
Ohio Giant. 
Pincushion. Ref. 89. 
Premium Hybrid. Ref. 14. 
Red Banana. 1937 intr., Gill 

Bros., Portland, Ore. 
Rocky Mountain. Ref. 130. 
Soanish Gourd. Refs. 19, 74, 

101. 
Sweet Nut. Refs. 26, 119, 

130. 
Underwood Blight Resistant. 
Utah Giant Field. Syn. Utah, 

Utah Mammoth Field. 
Valencia. Ref. 101. 
Vow Vow. 
West India Mammoth. Refs. 

14, 130. 
White Leghorn. 
Winter Belle. 
Woodbury. 
Yakima Marblehead. (Gill 

Bros.) 



which is not available today and therefore no plantings 
could be made to determine their status with reference 
to recognized standard sorts. 



Varieties of Cucurbita Popo 

Alsatian. Ref. 101. 

Barbadoes Cluster. 

Citron Bush. Refs. 49, 50. 

Columbian. Refs. 17, 130. 

Congo. Ref. 101. 

Cook's Favorite. Refs. 16, 
26. 

Cream Vegetable Marrow. 
Ref. 130. 

Early Lemon. 

Early Long Warted. 

Early Orange. 

Egg-shaped. Ref. 24. 

Extra Early Cluster. 

Golden Cluster. Refs. 14, 47. 

Hard Pumpkin. Ref. 94. 

Large Sweet. Ref. 130. 

Long Marrow. Ref. 88. 

Long Yellow Vegetable Mar- 
row. Ref. 101. 

Mammoth Sugar. Ref. 130. 

Mandarin Bush. Refs. 49, 50. 

Melon. Refs. 11, 124. 

Mexican Laguna. 

Missouri. Ref. 102. 

Nice. Ref. 101. 



Orange. Refs. 49, 50. 
Orange Custard Marrow. 

Refs. 32, 101. 
Prolific Field. Ref. 130. 
Red Field. 
Russian Queen. 
Small Florida. 
Sweet Field. Ref. 130. 
Sweetheart. 
White Bell. Ref. 19. 
White Warted Flat Custard 

Marrow. Ref. 101. 
Winter Nut. Refs. 33, 41. 73. 



Varieties of Cucurbita mos- 
chata 

African. 1937 intr., Kilgore 
Seed Co., Plant City, Fla. 

Bordeaux. Ref. 101. 

Crystal Spring. 

Egg Plant Squash. 

Lundgren. Ref. 13. 

Mirepoix. Ref. 101. 

Orange Color Giant Melon. 
Ref. 50. 

Violette. Ref. 101. 



SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



59 



REFERENCES FOR SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS 



.5. 

t. 
5. 
6. 

• . 

8. 

9. 
10. 

11. 
12. 
I .:. 
11. 
IS. 
16. 
17. 
18. 

14. 

.'IP. 



22. 
23. 
24. 



26. 

->- 

28! 

2<>. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
.5:5. 

34. 

35. 

■it,. 
:5T. 

38. 

39. 
10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

11. 
15. 

46. 
17. 

18. 
19. 
50. 
5L 



53. 
54. 
55. 

56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 

60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
61. 

6.',. 
66. 

67. 

68. 



Amer. Agric. 115:18. 1859. 

^mer. Agric. 18:73. 1859. 

Amer. Agric. 115:327. 1859. 

Amer. Agric. 22:372. 1863. 

Amer. Agric. 21:82. 1865. 

Amer. Agric. 21:317. 1865. 

Amer. Agric. 31:104. 1872. 

Amer. Agric. 32:64. 1873. 

Amer. Agric. 31:48. 1875. 

Amer. Card. 1(1:187. 1889. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. Orange Judd. New York. 1867. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. Orange Judd, New York. 1869. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. Orange Judd. New York. 1870. 

Bailey. L. H. Ann. of Hort. for L889. 1890. 

L. H. Ann. of Hort. for 11591. 209-210. 1892. 
Bailev. L. H. Ann. of Hort. for 1892. 1893. 
Bailey, L. H. Ann. of Hort. for 1893. 134. 1894. 
Bailey. L. H. Genres Herbarum, 2:60-115. 1929. 
Bridgeman. Thomas. Young Gardener's Assistant. C. M. 

Saxton and Co.. New York. 1857. 
Brill. Francis. Farm-Gardening and Seed Growing. Orange 

Judd, New York. 1883. 
Brose, M. C., Griffin, H. H., and Watrous. F. L. Col. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:41-13. 
Bulletin of Applied Botany. 23 3 : 290. 1929-1930. 
Burbank, Luther. Gardening. 5: 109-113. 1921. 
Burr, Fearing, Jr. Field and Garden Vegetables of America. 

Crosby and Nichols. Boston. 1863, 1865. 
Butz. G. C. and Baldwin, G. Perm. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1893. 138. 
Cenr. Exp. Farms Rpt. for 1895. 125-130. 
Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. for 1897. 347-349. 
Cent. Exp. Farms Rpt. 1901. 537. 
Cenr. Exp. Farms Rpt. 1903. 415. 
Cenf. Exp. Farms Rpt. for 19(11. 469. 
Cenf. Exp. Farms Rpt. for 1905. 417-418. 
Cenr. Exp. Farms Rpt. for 1910. 508. 
Castetter. E. F. and Erwin, A. T. Zona Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

244:107-136. 1927. 
Chorlton, Wm. Horticulturist. 12:307-308. 1857. 
Clark, W. S. Horticulturist, 30:193-196. 1875. 
Conover, G. S. The Gardeners' Monthly, 23:373. 1881. 
Corbett, L. C. South Dakota Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 42:88-92. 

1895. 
Corbett. L. C. and Davis, K. C. W. Va. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

81:378-382. 1902. 
Darragh. W. H. Agri. Gaz. of N. S. Wales, 873-878. 1929. 
Darragh, W. H. Agri. Gaz. of TV. S. Wales, 13:683-690. 

1932. 
Erwin. A. T. and Haber. C. S. Zona Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

263:345-372. 1929. 
Fessenden. T. G. New American Gardener. J. B. Russell, 

Boston, Mass. 1828. 284. 
Flint, C. L. Agr. of Mass. 1864. 205-208. 
Gardeners' Chronicle. 37—38. 1856. 
Geismar. L. M. and Smith, C. D. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Spc. Bui. 28:24-25. 1904. 
Gladden, H. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 109:1894. 
Gladden, H. P. and Hedrick, U. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Bui. 131:22. 1896. 
Goff, E. S. New York Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1884. 205-206. 
Goff, E. S. New York Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1886. 240-241. 
Goff, E. S. New York Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1887. 243-273. 
Green. S. B. Minn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1887-88. 253. 
Green, S. B. Vegetable Gardening. Webb. Pub. Co., St. 

Paul. Minn. 283-285. 1909. 
Gregory, J. J. H. Agr. of Mass. 1856. 423-425. 
Gregory. J. J. H. Agr. of Mass. 1869. 140-141. 
Gregory, J. J. H. Gardeners' Monthly. 7:138. 1865. 
Gregory, J. J. H. Mag. of Hort. 21:148-150. 1858. 
Gregory, J. J. H. Mag. of Hort. 2.5: 62-66. 1859. 
Gregory, J. J. H. Mag. of Hort. 25:120-123. 1859. 
Gregory, J. J. H. Squashes: How to Grow Them. Pub. by 

author, Marblehead. Mass. 1893. 
Halstead, B. D. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1903. 478-182. 
Halstead. B. D. TV. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1905. 492-501. 
Halstead, B. D. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1907. 353-356. 
Halstead, B. D. N. J. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1908. 268-269. 
Hansen. N. E. and Thornber, W. S. S. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Bui. 68:142-148. 1900. 
Harris, T. W. Mag. of Hort. 27:348-351. 1861. 
Hedrick, U. P. Sturtevant's Notes on Edible Plants. J. B. 

Lyon Co.. Albany, N. Y. 1919. 
Henderson, Peter. Gardening for Profit. Orange Judd, 

New York. 1867. 
Horticulturist, 28:26. 1873. 



(.'). 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 

71. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
81. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 

90. 
91. 

42. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 

98. 

99. 

100. 
101. 

102. 
103. 
101. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
111. 
115. 

116. 

117. 
118. 

119. 

120. 

121. 

122. 
123. 

121. 
125. 
126. 
127. 
128. 
129. 

130. 

131. 
132. 
133. 
131. 
135. 
136. 
137. 
138. 
139. 



Horticulturist. 2!!: 158. 1873. 
Horticulturist. .'50:334-335. 1875. 
Hovey. H. C. Mag. of Hort. 30: 100-102. 1864. 
Ives, J. N. New England Farmer. 13:121. 1834. 
Jones, H. A. and Rosa, J. T. Truck Crop Plants. McGraw- 
Hill, N. Y. 1928. 
Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 38:572-574. 1913. 
Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc 11:114 116. 1919. 
Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 19:118-120. 1924. 
Mag. of Hort. 5:35. 1839. 
Mag. of Hort. 7 :95. 1841. 
Mag. of Hort. 7:315. 1841. 
Market Growers Journal, 7:276. 1910. 
Market Growers Journal, 12:295. 1913. 
MarA-ef Growers Journal, 15:82-85. 1915. 
Market Growers Journal, 26:86. 1920. 
Market Growers Journal, 30:134. 1922. 
Market Growers Journal, 32:225-229. 1923. 
Market Growers Journal, 53:332. 1933. 
Market Growers Journal, 53:359. 1933. 
Minnot, C. W. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1889:138. 1890. 
Morgan, H. A. and Burnett, F. H. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

22 2nd Ser. : 715. 1893. 
Nev. Lincoln Co. Agr. Exp. Farm Rpt. 1909-10. 30-31. 
Newman, C. L. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 34: 117. 1895. 
New England Farmer, 5:314. 1827. 
New York Farmer. 1:191-193. 1828. 

Parker, A. C. TV. Y. State Museum Bui. 144:90-92. 1910. 
Rane, F. W. W. Va. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 39:151. 1895. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 99:1903. 
Rane. F. W. and Hall, H. F. TV. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

125:1906. 
Rawson, W. S. Success in Market Gardening. Pub. by 

author, Boston, Mass. 1892. 
Richman, E. S. and Cory, A. F. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1889. 104. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3:6. 1891. 
Robinson, W. The Vegetable Garden. John Murray, London. 

1920. 314-341. 
Rural TV. Y. 6:382-383. 1855. 
Rural TV. Y. 15:103. 1864. 

1884. 

1886. 

1887. 

1888. 

1888. 

1890. 

1898. 

1899. 

1909. 



Rural TV. Y. 13:810. 

Rural TV. Y. 45:773. 

Rural TV. Y. 16:677. 

Rural TV. Y. 17:77. 

Rural TV. Y. 17:196. 

Rural TV. Y. 19:87 7. 

Rural TV. Y. 37:244. 

Rural TV. Y. 58:854. 

Rural TV. Y. 68:267. 

Rural TV. Y. 70:1192. 1911. 

Rural TV. Y. 82:580. 1923. 

Stubbs, Wm. C. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 27 1 2nd Ser.): 

916-919. 1894. 
Stubbs, W. C, Burnette, F. H. and Watson. C. J. La. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 42 2nd Ser. : 1529. 1896. 
Taft, L. R. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 70:31. 1891. 
Taft, L. R. and Gladden, H. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

79:13. 1892. 
Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P. and Coryell, R. J. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 90:16-19. 1893. 
Taft. L. R., Gladden, H. P., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 144:236. 1897. 
Taft, L. R. and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

190:1901. 
Tapley, W. T. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 1923. 312-319. 
Tapley, W. T. and Bushnell, J. W. Minn. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Rpt. 1922. 85-94. 
The Cultivator. 3 iNew Ser. : 150. 1848. 
The Cultivator. 6 3rd Ser. :47— 18. 1858. 
The Gardeners' Monthly. 15:152. 1868. 
The Gardeners' Monthly. 15:23-24. 1873. 
The Gardeners' Monthly. 25:83. 1883. 
Thompson. H. C. Vegetable Crops. McGraw-Hill, N. Y. 

1931. 507-508. 
Tracy, W. W. U. S. D. A. Bur. PI. Ind. Bui. 21. 1903. 
Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 1860. 60. 
Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 1877. 17-19. 

1879. 176-177. 
1882. 165-169. 
1898. 34-36. 
382-383. 



Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 
Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 
Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 
U. S. D. A. Rpt. 1854. 



Vilmorin-Andrieux. Les Plantes Potageres, Paris. 1883. 
Yeager, A. F. TV. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 233:80-81. 1930. 
Yeager, A. F. and Latzke, E. TV. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 
258:1-19. 1932. 



CHAPTER IV 



MUSKMELONS 



The first record of the muskmelon being grown 
in the New World was made by Columbus in 1494 
upon the return from his second voyage. Nothing is 
known concerning the type of melons grown, but they 
apparently gave rise to desirable sorts, for their dif- 
fusion into other parts of America was quite rapid. 
Cartier reported their presence in 1535 among the 
Indians near the present city of Montreal, and they were 
known to exist in Virginia in 1609. Similar reports 
indicate that the Indians grew them in the vicinity of 
Philadelphia prior to 1748. In M'Mahon's catalog of 
1806, 13 sorts are listed all of which were direct importa- 
tions from the Old World and accounts of which are 
included in European literature. Of these Citron and 
Nutmeg have apparently served as foundation stock for 
the large number of green-fleshed melons which have 
been developed. It is said that the Citron or Green 
Fleshed melon was brought into France by a monk from 
Africa in 1777, and that it spread from there to many 
countries and gave rise to numerous varieties. From 
one of these the variety Pineapple arose and was listed 
by Thorburn at least as early as 1824. About ten years 
later Skillman's Netted was introduced and continued 
to be a favorite sort for many years. 

Orange-fleshed sorts were known to have been culti- 
vated at the time of M'Mahon. Just when the common 
muskmelon of Mawe and Abercrombie appeared is not 
known, although Long Yellow, acknowledged to be the 
same, was definitely known about 1846. Soon after 
that date these highly colored sorts became more promi- 
nent as evidenced by the introduction of Christiana about 
1850, Sill's Hybrid in 1870 and Surprise in 1876. An 
orange-fleshed melon introduced into this country some- 
time after Perry's visit to Japan in 1853, later designated 
as White Japan, may have had a decided influence in the 
development of Surprise and others of its type. 

Although there are many instances in the literature 
which emphasize the existence of extreme variation 
among muskmelons, growers and seedsmen apparently 
were not especially interested in the selection and further 
development of them until after 1880. In the decade 
1880 to 1890 no less than 17 new and distinct sorts were 
cataloged, among them being Acme, Champion Market, 
Emerald Gem, Hackensack, Irondequoit, Miller's Cream, 
Netted Gem and Osage. The next decade saw the great- 
est varietal development of any 10 -year period in the his- 
tory of American muskmelons when nearly 30 distinct 
sorts were introduced. At this time Bender, Cosmopoli- 
tan, Gold Coin, Grand Rapids, Kinsman Queen, Long 
Island Beauty, Paul Rose, Tip Top, and a host of others 
were listed as new sorts. Interest receded slightly at 
the beginning of the 20th century, the production of 
the first 20 years merely equalling that of the preceding 
10. This period saw the development of Defender, Ford- 



hook, Knight, Pollock No. 25, Hearts of Gold, Melodew 
and Pollock No. 10-25. The last 15 years have shown a 
marked increase in the development cf new varieties 
during which period there have been 2 7 new introductions. 
Most notable among these are Delicious, Edward's 
Perfecto, Golden Champlain, Hale's Best, Honey Rock, 
Peerless Pearl, Imperial Sunset and Weaver Special. 

Before the introduction of Netted Gem and the 
consequent development of the Rocky Ford melons, the 
area devoted to the culture of muskmelons extended 
from the northeastern states south to Georgia and the 
Carolinas and as far west as Missouri. As compared 
to the present when some 35 states make commercial 
shipments, one is impressed with the revolutionary 
changes which occurred and which can be very largely 
traced to the development of Netted Gem, coupled 
with better shipping facilities. Obviously growers in 
the melon shipping districts conducted variety trials 
to determine the value of other sorts, and in so doing 
undoubtedly brought about some hybridization. As a 
result, the development of such varieties and strains as 
Eden Gem, Pollock No. 25, Pollock 10-25, Edwards 
Perfecto, Superfecto, Hale's Best, etc., present a rather 
involved situation, the details of which can be read in 
the discussion of the above mentioned varieties. 



1 Lindley, George, Guide to Orchard and Kitchen Garden. 



DISCUSSION OF CLASSIFICATIONS 

Although several early writers included lists of melon 
varieties few of them made any attempt to classify the 
existing sorts. The 9 varieties listed by Mawe and 
Abercrombie in 1778 were the most comprehensive list 
available at that time. Apparently each of the three 
botanical varieties was represented, yet no distinction 
was made between them. 

In 1831 Lindley 1 , an English writer, made a compre- 
hensive study of the melons and published his classifica- 
tion. The group was first divided into two divisions, 
based on the season at which the melons were used, viz: 
summer melons and winter melons. Each of these in 
turn were further divided according to the color of the 
flesh (red, green, or green and white) and thickness of 
the rind (thick, moderately thick or thin). Apparently 
all were known simply as melons, for there is no evidence 
of a separation based on present day recognized botanical 
varieties. 

Vilmorin-Andrieux in their first edition of Les 
Plantes Potageres (1856), included a very comprehen- 
sive discussion of varieties. In succeeding editions 
additional information was included and in 1883, the 
melons were divided into two major groups, netted 
melons and cantaloupe or Rock melons. The former was 
further divided into varieties of major importance on the 
continent, other varieties of netted melons, and English 
and American varieties. The last group was again 

London, England. 1831. 

60 



MUSKMELONS 



61 



classified according to flesh color as being either red, 
green or white. No secondary division was made of the 
cantaloupe or Rock melons. 

The first comprehensive book on American garden- 
ing was written by Bernard McMahon and was published 
in 1806. thirty years after the signing of the Declaration 
of Independence. In it was included a group of 13 melon 
varieties, which up to that time was the most complete 
assortment in America. 

In 1863 Fearing Burr, Jr., published his " Field and 
Garden Vegetables of America," a treatise devoted 
almost entirely to the discussion of vegetable varieties. 
In writing of melon varieties Burr states " These are 
exceedingly numerous, in consequence of the great 
facility with which the various kinds intermix or hybrid- 
ize. Varieties are, however, much more easily produced 
than retained; consequently old names are almost 
annually discarded from the catalogs of seedsmen and 
gardeners, and new names with superior recommenda- 
tions, offered in their stead." He divided the varieties 
into two groups, the common and the Persian melons. 
No further differentiation is made of the 31 varieties and 
synonyms discussed. 

As with squash and pumpkins, the state agricultural 
experiment stations from the time of their origin until 
the first few years of the present century conducted 
numerous variety trials of muskmelons. A very compre- 
hensive study of varieties was undertaken by F. W. Rane 
at the New Hampshire Agricultural Experiment Station 
in 1895, which culminated in the publication of a classifi- 
cation of American muskmelons in 1901. The thesis of 
this study was based on the assumption that all American 
varieties of muskmelons could be readily grouped 
according to size and shape into the following eight 
classes or " types " as Rane called them, viz., Jenny 
Lind, Rocky Ford, Hackensack, Montreal, Cosmo- 
politan, Acme-Osage, Long Yellow and Bay View. As 
the classification developed each type was further 
differentiated according to the depth of rib, degree of 
netting and color of flesh. Until the last ten years the 
work of Rane has been acknowledged the standard of 
comparison, but the recent development of modern varie- 
ties, particularly the shipping types, has very largely 
restricted Rane's classification to varieties of historical 
interest. Although considerable work was accomplished 
by earlier investigators at Geneva, this crop was one of 
the few for which no classification was proposed. 

W. R. Beattie advanced a simple classification in 
1926 very largely based on adaptation for use. Two 
classes were suggested, netted melons and winter or 
special melons. The former was further divided into 
shipping varieties and those adapted for home and market 
garden purposes, each of which was again divided into 
variety groups or types, viz., Defender, Netted Gem, 
Tip-Top, Hackensack, Millers Cream, Jenny Lind, 
Fordhook, Emerald Gem, Sweet Air and Montreal 
Market. No further division was suggested for the 
winter melons. 

In 1932 J. T. Rosa, long interested in melon varieties, 
developed a more comprehensive classification than the 



latter and one more adaptable to modern varieties. 
This was based entirely on the establishment of a group 
type. All varieties which could be included were further 
divided according to color of flesh and occasionally to 
slight shape deviation. Ten group types were estab- 
lished, viz., Netted Gem, Pollock or Rocky Ford, Hoo 
Doo, Burrell Gem, Hackensack, Osage, Nutmeg, Jenny 
Lind, Tip Top and Montreal Market. The winter 
melons were divided into three classifications, Persian, 
which included the Armenian or Turkish, Honey Dew and 
Casaba. 

No attempt has been made in this study to develop 
a classification of any sort. With the exception of an 
occasional minor difference of opinion regarding the 
establishment of a variety type as a distinct group, 
muskmelon classifications are, for the most part, satis- 
factory. At the present time very little change in the 
general type of varieties is in evidence. There is, 
however, a decided increase in the development of new 
strains, but since these can usually be differentiated only 
on the basis of such characters as yield, uniformity, 
disease resistance, adaptability, etc., there is little value 
in additional classification based on purely morphological 
characters, which after all, are the true bases of varietal 
separation. The order of discussion of varieties in this 
publication is, therefore, alphabetical and includes a few 
botanical varieties other than Cucumis melo var. reti- 
culatus, in order to acknowledge all types of commercial 
importance in this country. 

Acme. Refs. 4, 23, 25, 28, 29, 38, 39, 45, 46, 48, 49, 53, 

58, 83, 84, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 

98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 

125, 127, 128, 133, 136, 142, 144. Syns. Acme 

Citron, Baltimore, Baltimore Acme, Baltimore 

Citron, Baltimore Market, Baltimore Musk, 

Baltimore Nutmeg, Baltimore Rough, Early 

Baltimore, Knights Early Maryland, Large Acme, 

Large Baltimore, Melting Sugar. 

The precise origin of this melon is unknown. Prior 

to the introduction of Acme in the catalogs of D. Lan- 

dreth 8b Sons for 1884, Peter Henderson 8s Co. for 1886 

and D. M. Ferry &s Co. 1888, the variety Nutmeg was 

the leading green-fleshed sort. This nutmeg melon, 

although smaller in many respects, resembled the new 

introduction. Acme quickly gained popularity and, in 

its season, could always be found in the best hotels of 

Philadelphia, New York and Baltimore. The variety 

has remained in cultivation and has continued to be used 

in the south. 

This midseason variety matured at Geneva a few 
days earlier than Rocky Ford, in season with Hackensack, 
and 4-6 days later than Anne Arundel and Knight. 
The fruits are very similar to those of Anne Arundel in 
shape, although more often oval than that variety. The 
netting is less regular and more streaked, while the flesh 
is more yellowish green. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately slender, branches many. 

Fruit medium large, 7—7 ' j " 5—5 ' i inches; weight 3-3 ' 2 

pounds. Shape oval to fusiform, distinctly protuberant at the 

base; full and rounded at the apex; blossom scar moderately con- 



62 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



spicuous; ribs moderately prominent, 1% inches broad at the medial; 
furrows medium broad, moderately shallow and smooth. Netting 
moderately abundant, rather coarsely interlaced, often streaked; 
cork heavy, distributed uniformly over the ribs; interstices moder- 
ately deep; skin color creamy yellow sparsely mottled with green. 
Flesh pale green near the rind, blending gradually to pale 
yellowish white adjacent to the cavity, moderately thin, 1-1 J i inches; 
texture moderately soft and juicy, fibrous. Very sweet, rather 
highly flavored, aroma mild; quality moderately good. Cavity 
moderately large, 5 x 2} 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
thick, '4 inch, moderately tough. 

Admiral Togo. Refs. 15, 58, 109, 136. Syns. Gold 
Nugget, Iowa Standard. 

D. M. Ferry & Co., Detroit, Michigan, offered this 
in 1907 as a small oval melon combining the quality of 
Defender with the netting and shipping qualities of the 
Netted Gem. Listed by Ferry continuously through 
1926 it gained many friends as a medium early sweet 
melon. Joseph Harris 8b Co. continued to list the 
variety through 1931. 

It was a moderately early variety, maturing about 
4-6 days earlier than Burrell's Gem, in season with Netted 
Gem and 4-6 days later than Golden Champlain. It 
most resembled Netted Gem in shape, size and netting 
characteristics but had flesh much like that of Burrell's 
Gem. 

Fruit small, 4 J 2-5 x 4— 4^2 inches; weight 1 J 4— 1 J 2 pounds. 
Shape short oval, symmetrical, blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly 
prominent, IJ4 inches broad at the medial; furrows broad, shallow 
and usually smooth. Netting abundant, medium coarsely inter- 
laced; cork medium heavy, rather broadened and uniformly dis- 
tributed over the ribs. Skin color dark green. Flesh orange, 
moderately thin, 1—1) s inches; texture medium fine, rather fibrous, 
firm and juicy; sweet, highly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
good. Cavity very small, 2 x IJ2- 1?4 inches, circular in cross- 
section. Rind medium thick, J s inch, tough and strong. 

Allen's Superb. Refs. 44, 45. 

This variety with oval, thickly netted fruit was listed 
and described in the 1875 catalog of D. M. Ferry & Co. 
It was also carried by Hovey in 1863 and Thorburn in 
1861. The flesh was green and sweet and in general 
the variety was classed in the nutmeg group. 

Anne Arundel. Refs. 4, 40, 53, 83, 84, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 105, 107, 112, 133. 

As introduced this variety was an improvement on 
the Acme or Baltimore Market. Griffith 8b Turner of 
Baltimore and Geo. Tait 8b Sons, Norfolk, Virginia, were 
the first to offer seed although it had been grown previous 
to 1890 by a number of the leading growers of Anne 
Arundel County, Maryland. A clear cut photograph of 
this melon was shown in the 1898 catalog of Johnson 8b 
Stokes. D. Landreth 8b Sons, Philadelphia, also listed 
the variety in 1892. For many years it was a popular 
variety in the tri-state region. 

This is a moderately early variety which matured 
at Geneva 5 6 days earlier than Hackensack, in season 
with Knight and about a week later than Jenny Lind. 
The fruits are much like Acme in shape, although 
slightly larger and more distinctly fusiform. The netting 
is much more uniformly interlaced and shows less tend- 
ency to form long streaks. The flesh of Anne Arundel 



is brighter green and does not have the yellowish portion 
present in Acme. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately heavy and coarse; branches 
many. 

Fruit medium large, 7 J 2-8 x 5-5 ' 2 inches; weight 3—+ pounds. 
Shape fusiform; apex raised; base extended; ribs moderately promi- 
nent, 1 3 4 inches broad at the medial; furrows distinct, medium 
broad, moderately shallow and smooth. Netting moderately 
abundant, medium finely laced; cork heavy, distributed uniformly 
over the ribs, the base and apex; interstices moderately deep. 
Skin color creamy yellow, sparsely mottled with green. Flesh 
light green, medium thick, 1 ' 4 1 ' o inches; texture medium soft, 
moderately juicy, slightly coarse and fibrous; sweet, somewhat 
sprightly, rather mildly flavored and mild aroma; quality fair to 
moderately good. Cavity moderately large, 4x2'j inches, circular 
in cross-section. Rind thick, } 4 inch, strong and moderately tough. 

Atlantic City. Syns. Atlantic City Extra Early, Early 
Atlantic City. 
This was a variety which, when introduced in 1889 
by D. Landreth 8b Sons of Philadelphia, was advocated 
as an improvement over Baltimore Citron. A green- 
fleshed sort it apparently differed little from that variety 
except in size. It was cataloged as Atlantic City Extra 
Early up to 1918. 

Banana. Refs. 4, 15, 21, 26, 29, 39, 45, 49, 53, 54, 84, 
88, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 106, 124, 127, 
132, 133, 136, 144. Syns. Banana Citron, Cuban 
Banana, Mexican Banana. 

This melon has been offered as a novelty practically 
since the time seed catalogs became the popular medium 
for the listing of seeds and plants. In the catalog 
of James J. H. Gregory of 1885 he wrote: " None of the 
170 varieties of vegetables exhibited by me at the 
exhibition of the Essex Agricultural Society in the fall 
of 1883 created a greater interest than the Banana melon. 
When ripe it reminds one of a large overgrown banana and 
what is a singular coincidence, it smells like one, having 
a remarkably powerful and delicious fragrance." 

It was one of the latest sorts to mature at Geneva, 
being in season with Giant and about 4 6 days later 
than Montreal Market. It is a rather unique variety 
and although occasionally somewhat netted, it seems to 
be intermediate in certain respects between the common 
muskmelon and Cucumis melo var. flexuousus. 

Plant vigorous; vines medium slender; branches many. 

Fruit very large, 15-18 x 4-4 .'2 inches; weight 3j£-4 pounds. 
Shape very long cylindrical, often moderately curved near the base, 
somewhat tapering at base and apex; blossom scar obscure; ribs 
prominent, very numerous, '_> 'i inch broad at the medial; fur- 
rows very numerous, narrow, moderately shallow and smooth. 
Netting very sparse, usually long and streaked, or very coarsely 
interlaced, very often entirely lacking; cork medium heavy and 
broad, distributed unevenly; interstices shallow. Skin color 
creamy yellow. Flesh salmon orange to orange, moderately thin, 
1-1 } 4 inches; texture fine, fiberless, soft and juicy; very sweet, 
often nauseous, very mildly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
fair to moderately good. Cavity very large, 10-12 x 1 ' 1 1 ' ■< inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, V ( inch, soft and rather weak. 

Banquet. Refs. 4, 9, 29, 38, 53, 83, 84, 92, 96, 97, 98, 
99, 100, 101, 106, 107, 125, 127, 128, 133, 136, 144. 
Syn. New Banquet. 
This melon was introduced in 1891 by Peter Hender- 
son 8b Co., W. Atlee Burpee 8b Co., and others as a very 



I 




MUSKMELONS 



63 



promising red-fleshed sort. It originated with Chauncy 
P. Coy of Nebraska and probably resulted as a selection 
from the same line that produced the Delmonico. It 
was a medium sized melon, nearly globular in shape, 
profusely netted and possessed a deep reddish orange 
flesh. The name served to ensure the variety wide- 
spread trial but after 1900 it was seldom offered. 

Barling's Molilalia. 

This is a variety which originated in Montana and 
has been listed since 1922 by the State Nursery and 
Seed Co. of Helena. It is an early variety reaching 
maturity at Geneva 6 8 days earlier than Acme, in 
season with Jenny Lind and 6 8 days later than Extra 
Early Citron. The fruits most resemble Acme, although 
they are smaller, somewhat less tapered at the base and 
have more finely interlaced netting. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6 1 ;; x 4 ] ;>-5 inches; weight 2-2 U 
pounds. Shape oval, base occasionally somewhat protuberant, 
apex even, blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly prominent, 1 ' •_> inches 
broad at the medial; furrows moderately shallow and smooth. 
Netting moderately abundant, rather finely interlaced; cork heavy, 
uniformly distributed over the ribs, base and apex. Skin color 
dull orange sparsely mottled with green. Flesh light green blend- 
ing to nearly white at cavity, thin, 7 *-l inch; texture medium coarse, 
fibrous, rather firm and juicy: sweet, highly flavored, very spicy and 
mildly aromatic; quality fair to good. Cavity medium large, 
4x2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, '4 inch, 
medium and strong. 

Bay View. Refs. 23, 25, 26, 28, 39, 45, 46, 49, 53, 69, 
88, 90, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 106, 
107, 108, 112, 124, 133, 136, 139, 140, 142, 144. 
Syns. Bayview Hybrid, Giant of Colorado, Home 
Sweet Home, Sweet Home. 
Bay View is an old variety w : hich was long celebrated 
as the largest and longest green -fleshed melon in existence. 
Introduced by W. Atlee Burpee & Co. in 1877, it had a 
long career, having been offered by that concern con- 
tinuously until 1922. It was reputedly the hybrid of 
Casaba and a large California muskmelon, but its char- 
acteristics would not lead one to suspect such parentage. 
Johnson & Stokes in 1899 and the Gurney Seed & 
Nursery Co., of Yankton, South Dakota, in 1912 listed 
Giant of Colorado which seemed to very closely resemble 
the older Bay View. 

It is a late variety at Geneva, maturing about a 
week later than Bender's Surprise, 10 days later than 
Long Yellow and in season with Banana and Giant. In 
shape it most resembles Long Yellow, but differs in 
flesh color and is more completely netted than that 
variety. 

Plant vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches many. 

Fruit very large, 10-12 x 5}>-6 inches; weight 7-8 pounds, 
often 10-12 pounds when grown under ideal conditions. Shape 
oblong, apex rounded; base somewhat tapering and extended; ribs 
prominent, l 3 4-2 inches broad at the medial; furrows broad, deep 
and smooth, extending from base to apex. Netting medium in 
amount, rather coarsely interlaced, often streaked; cork coarse and 
heavy, distributed moderately uniform over the ribs; interstices 
moderately deep. Skin color tawny to yellowish brown. Flesh 
light green, often with a yellowish tint at full maturity, medium 
thick, l'-il^ inches; texture rather coarse, moderately firm, 
somewhat juicy, rather fibrous; slightly sweet, poorly flavored, mild 
aroma; quality moderately poor. Cavity very large, 7-8 x 2}^-2j-£ 



inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, >.| inch, rather weak 
and tender. 

Bender. Refs. 15, 36, 54, 58, 64, 65, 75, 78, 79, 82, 105, 
109, 121, 129, 143. Syns. Bender's Surprise, 
Big Bender, Dee-light, Harute, Juicy Fruit. 

The Bender melon has come to be the leading variety 
in New York State grown for local market, roadside sale 
and, with the advent of shipment by truck, for short haul 
shipment. Charles Bender, who, on a farm within sight 
of the Helderberg Mountain ridge, in the Albany, New 
York, section, began growing melons in 1884 and in 
1900 developed the variety now known as the Bender. 
This variety, which in many ways is similar to Surprise, 
Irondequoit and Tip Top, represents a long period of 
selection with these varieties as a basis. The seed 
strains which are available today, some sold by seeds- 
men and others by private growers who have made 
a specialty of melons, produce lines which vary some- 
what according to the individual conception of the 
variety type. The number of variety names and strains 
for this large-fruited type delayed the distribution of this 
particular name but the Joseph Harris Seed Co. offered 
it in 1917 as a superior strain of Surprise. 

The variety is included among the midseason sorts 
at Geneva, maturing about a week later than Delicious, 
in season with Irondequoit and 10 or 12 days earlier than 
Montreal Market. It most resembles Irondequoit in 
form, although it is larger than that variety, more 
coarsely interlaced, has a much more prominent blossom 
scar and is known to be a better keeper. Its similarity 
to that variety has led many to believe the two are 
synonymous. Well bred stocks of the two, however, 
are distinct. 

Plant very vigorous; vines very coarse and heavy; branches 
moderately many. 

Fruit very large, 8-9 x 7J4~8j2 inches; weight 6-8 pounds, occa- 
sionally more. Shape very short oval, slightly enlarged at the base; 
apex rounded, blossom scar large and very prominent; base rounded 
and occasionally somewhat flattened; ribs prominent, 2 l i inches 
broad at the medial; furrows broad, medium depth, smooth and 
extend from base to apex; netting medium in amount, coarsely 
interlaced; cork broad and heavy, distributed unevenly over the 
ribs; interstices moderately deep; skin color grayish green, turning 
creamy yellow I cream color) at maturity. Flesh orange; thick, 
1 3 4~2 inches, uniform; texture rather soft, very juicy, slightly 
coarse and fibrous; very sweet, rather highly flavored, aroma mild 
and pleasant; general quality very good. Cavity very large, 
5x4 inches; circular in cross-section. Rind very thick, 3 s inch, 
and moderately strong. 

Bird. Refs. 4, 28, 46, 53, 91, 96, 98, 99, 100, 106, 111, 
127, 133, 144. 
The Bird cantaloupe was one of the first melons to 
be developed in this country, its history having been 
recorded in the Rural New Yorker for 1885. The 
originator, F. E. Bird of Denver, Colorado, claimed for 
his new melon extreme earliness, large size, fine flavor 
and good keeping qualities. Seed which had been saved 
from Green Montreal muskmelons grown in the garden 
adjacent to a row of Bay View was planted and one 
vine produced melons so different and outstanding that 
seed was again saved. After several years testing seed 
was supplied to Gregory, Burpee and other seedsmen 



64 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



and until about 1901 the variety was well known. The 
fruits were large often weighing up to 20 pounds, " oblong, 
heavily netted, with green flesh, rather coarse in quality 
but quite sweet." 

Bottomly. Refs. 58, 109. Syn. Schramm. 

This melon, which belongs in the Netted Gem group, 
was a selection from Anne Arundel. First offered in 
1918 by George Tait & Sons of Norfolk, Virginia, it has 
seemed well suited to growing conditions as found in the 
tri-state area and Virginia. Thos. F. Bcttomly of 
Maryland made the original selection and the variety 
bears his name. An earlier selection from the Bottomly 
was made by the Schramm Brothers of Maryland and 
this became known as the Schramm Melon. 

It is a moderately early variety, having reached 
maturity at Geneva several days earlier than Acme, in 
season with Anne Arundel, and about a week later than 
Early Prolific Nutmeg. The fruits are similar in shape 
to Anne Arundel, being less fusiform and more oval. 
The netting is more profuse and more finely interlaced 
while the flesh is darker green in color. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines medium coarse and heavy. 

Fruit moderately small, 5J4/-6 x 4-4 J i inches; weight 1 J -_.-2 
pounds. Shape oval, apex even and rounded; blossom scar moder- 
ately conspicuous; base full and rounded, occasionally somewhat 
tapered; ribs obscure, about 1 '4 inches broad at the medial, not very 
uniform; furrows narrow, shallow, smooth, and extend from base to 
apex. Netting abundant, finely interlaced, particularly at the apex; 
cork heavy, distributed uniformly over the ribs, base and apex; 
interstices moderately deep with skin rather profusely covered with 
hair-like fuzz; skin color green, slightly mottled with dull orange 
yellow. Flesh green, medium thick, l'| inches; texture medium 
firm, rather juicy, slightly coarse and fibrous; sweet, rather sprightly, 
highly flavored, pleasant aroma; quality good. Cavity small, 
2)4 x 2 inches, somewhat triangular in crors-section. Rind medium 
thick, J \ inch, strong and tough. 

BurrelTs Gem. Refs. 15, 54, 58, 64, 74, 75, 101, 105, 

109, 110, 129, 133, 136, 143. Syns. Benton 

Harbor Gem, Berry's Favorite, Burrell's Netted 

Gem, Defender, Earliest Gem, Early Wonder, 

Farthest North, Ferry's New Defender, Gem, 

Golden Treasure, Improved Burrell's Gem, Jumbo 

Pink, Jumbo Pink Meat, Mill's Famous, Ordway 

Cantaloupe, Ordway Gem, Ordway Pink, Ordway 

Pink Meat, Ordway Queen, Pink Flesh, Pink 

Meat, Red Rocky Ford, Salmon Fleshed. 

Defender was introduced by D. M. Ferry & Co. of 

Detroit in 1901 and probably came as a selection from 

the variety Paul Rose. Soon after its introduction a 

selection from it was introduced by D. V. Burrell, 

Rocky Ford, Colorado, and called Burrell's Gem. In 

the 1907 Burrell catalog this is stated to possess " a 

combination of the characteristics of the following 

varieties: Osage, Defender, Rocky Ford, and Acme, and 

more particularly the Defender and Acme." Since that 

time the names " Defender " and " Burrell's Gem " have 

been practically synonymous and while the latter is 

more frequently used, a qualifying statement is often 

made; " known also as ' Defender ' or ' Ordway Pink 

Meat.' ' The last represents merely a thicker-meated 

strain named for the town, Ordway, Colorado.) 



As a midseason shipping melon this variety has few 
equals. It produced edible fruits 4 or 5 days earlier 
than Pollock 10-25, in season with Hearts of Gold, and 
a few days later than Bender's Surprise and Hale's Best. 
The netting is much more streaked and the fruits more 
fusiform than Hale's Best and are furrowed similarly to 
Hearts of Gold. The netting is much like that of Hale's 
Best, although often is not as finely interlaced. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and heavy. 

Fruit moderately small, 6 l ^-7 x 4} £-4 ' 2 inches; weight 2 ] 2-3 
pounds. Shape long oval, apex and base somewhat rounded to 
slightly tapered; blossom scar obscure; ribs rather prominent, l'j 
inches broad at the medial; furrows moderately narrow, shallow, 
smooth and conspicuous. Netting abundant, moderately fine laced; 
cork medium heavy, distributed uniformly over the ribs, base and 
apex; interstices medium deep. Skin color dark green becoming 
rather yellowish green at full maturity Flesh salmon-orange, 
moderately thick, IJ2— 1 3 4 inches; texture fine, moderately firm, 
moderately juicy, somewhat pulpy; sweet, rather sprightly, 
highly flavored, pleasant aroma; quality very good. Cavity mod- 
erately small, 4 x l'o inches, triangular in cross-section. Rind 
medium thick, ' , inch, strong and tough. 

Bush. Refs. 74, 109. Syns. Henderson Bush, Vineless, 
Vineless Jenny Lind. 
This is the first muskmelon to be introduced, of all 
the hundreds of special introductions, as a vineless or 
bush variety. After several years of breeding and 
selecting, Peter Henderson & Co. in 1912 offered it as 
Henderson Bush. " Valuable and remarkable as a seed 
novelty, a climax in plant breeding and vine curtail- 
ment," its merit was especially extolled because of 
the increased number of hills which might be planted on 
a given acre. The bush character was obtained by a 
shortening of the stem between the nodes. The fruits 
were green-fleshed very similar to the popular Jenny 
Lind. 

California Beauty. Refs. 133, 146. Syn. California 
Large Nutmeg. 
This was introduced by Johnson 85 Musser Seed Co., 
Los Angeles, in 1898 as an extra early green-fleshed 
melon similar to Hackensack. Judging from illustrations 
which appeared in early catalogs the fruits seem to have 
been slightly smaller and to have more closely meshed 
netting. The variety was popular on the San Francisco 
market and is in limited use in some sections today. 

Captain. Refs. 26, 53, 98, 99, 100. 

This melon, a green-fleshed sort, attracted attention 
because of its earliness. It was somewhat like Hacken- 
sack but smaller, and was pictured in the 1897 catalog 
of Johnson & Stokes, Philadelphia. Popular for some 
time on the markets of that city nevertheless it was 
offered only for a few years. 

Casaba. Refs. 10, 14, 15, 22, 28, 29, 32, 39, 41, 45, 46, 

49, 58, 88, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 105, 

108, 109, 110, 120, 124, 127, 129, 133, 134, 136, 

142, 144, 146. 

The Casaba, native to Asia Minor, belongs to the 

winter melon group. The name itself is derived from the 

town Kassabah near Smyrna. Inasmuch as it is very late 

in maturing and requires a long growing season, it has 



MUSKMELONS 



65 



not been found suitable except in parts of California 
and the Southwest. 

Casaba was known to eastern growers about 1850 
when the Patent Office distributed seed under this name. 
This melon was from Persia but records show that in 
type it was similar to Bay View. It was also known as 
Odessa or Persian. A similar sort was popularized by 
General Bidwell of Chico, California, as the Bidwell 
Casaba. The Green Persian, which seems to have been 
very similar if not identical with the latter, was offered 
by Ross of Boston in 1827. 

According to L. H. Bailey (14), seed of Casaba 
melons was sent from Smyrna to California in 1878 by 
Dr. J. D. B. Stillman and James L. Flood who found 
the melons in the hotels of that city. Mr. G. P. Rixford, 
then connected with the Evening Bulletin, was instru- 
mental in distributing seed to rural subscribers. How- 
ever, this type of melon did not become popular until 
some forty years later. 

The commercial Casaba melon industry began about 
1909 when the San Joaquin Valley Melon Growers 
Association shipped several carloads of Golden Beauty 
Casaba to Portland, Oregon. Since then the business 
has grown and this type of melon is now well known in 
all markets of the country. Aggeler & Musser of Los 
Angeles have done much to promote the popularity of 
these melons and in 1909 listed nine varieties. They 
have also introduced some hybrids between the Casaba 
and cantaloupe melon. 

Several varieties of this type are grown in the South- 
west at the present time, chief of which is Golden Beauty. 
The fruits are large, oblate oval or short pyriform in 
shape, lemon -yellow in skin color, tough skinned, net 
netted or ribbed, but profusely marked with longitudinal 
corrugations or deep wrinkles. The flesh is very thick, 
nearly white in color, juicy, without aroma, sweet and 
of good quality when properly ripened. 

Santa Claus is of secondary importance, much longer 
than thick, nearly cylindrical, somewhat tapered at the 
ends, smooth skinned and colored with blotches of black 
and yellow. The interior is much like Golden Beauty. 

Winter Pineapple and Golden Hybrid are minor 
sorts belonging to this group. The former was sup- 
posedly the first of the Casabas to be introduced to 
America. It is practically identical with Golden Beauty 
except in color, that of Winter Pineapple being light 
green when fully mature. 

Champion Market. Refs. 22, 23, 29, 35, 38, 39, 47, 

53, 69, 88, 91, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 

106, 107, 127, 133, 136, 140, 144. Syns. Bridgton 

Favorite, Starn's Favorite. 

This melon was introduced in 1887 by W. Atlee 

Burpee & Co., James J. H. Gregory, A. W. Livingston 

Sons, Vaughan Seed Co., and possibly others. The same 

year Wm. Henry Maule introduced the melon under the 

name Starn's Favorite. E. N. Starn of Fairton, New 

Jersey, a well known melon grower, had worked with the 

seed stock for about ten years before it was purchased by 

the seed trade. For many years it was widely grown for 



the New York trade, and was justly popular because of 
its size and quality. 

Champion Market is a late variety which matured at 
Geneva a few days earlier than Montreal Market, in 
season with Chicago Market and about a week or 10 
days later than Bender's Surprise. The fruits are similar 
to those of Montreal Market, being less symmetrical, 
smaller and less uniformly netted. The fruits are also 
more globular than those of Chicago Market, somewhat 
less deeply furrowed, and more yellowish green in flesh 
color. 

Plant vigorous, vines medium heavy and coarse; branches 
many. 

Fruit medium large, 6— 6 ] 2 x 53-2—6 inches; weight 4— 4j^ 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, often somewhat lop-sided; base 
full to somewhat flattened; apex even and slightly flattened, blossom 
scar conspicuous; ribs prominent, 13 2-2 inches broad at the medial, 
not very uniform; furrows medium broad and deep, smooth. Netting 
moderately abundant, rather coarsely interlaced; cork moderately 
heavy, distributed uniformly over the ribs, base and apex; inter- 
stices moderately deep. Skin color green, sparsely mottled with 
pale yellow. Flesh light green to greenish yellow near the cavity, 
moderately thin, 1-1 1 1 inches, thinner at the apex; texture coarse 
and fibrous, moderately firm and juicy; sweet, somewhat sprightly, 
rather highly flavored, mild aroma; quality fair. Cavity large, 
4 x 3}{ inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, J 4 inch, 
thinner at the apex, rather soft, medium tough. 

Chicago Market. Refs. 4, 23, 29, 40, 44, 46, 49, 53, 

91, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 109, 125, 127, 
133, 144. Syns. Chicago, Chicago Market Nut- 
meg, Chicago Nutmeg, Giant Chicago, Giant 
Chicago Market, Improved Large Green Nutmeg. 
This melon, a probable selection from Montreal 
Market, was developed by A. Calvin, a gardener near 
Chicago. The exact date of its introduction is not 
known, but since it was offered by Gregory in 1882 it 
was possibly listed by Vaughan and other Chicago 
seedsmen about that time. The variety never became 
popular as a shipping melon as the fruits were somewhat 
flattened at the ends, but was a desirable sort for the 
home garden. 

This is a late variety maturing at Geneva a few 
days earlier than Montreal Market, in season with 
Champion Market and about a week or 10 days later 
than Bender's Surprise. It is much like Montreal 
Market in type, differing from that variety in being 
smaller, less uniformly netted and usually less symmetri- 
cal. It is similar to Champion Market in many respects 
but is more oblate, somewhat more deeply furrowed and 
with brighter green flesh color. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines medium coarse and medium 
slender; branches moderately many. 

Fruit moderately large, 6-6J2 x 7— 7J*2 inches; weight 4};>-5 
pounds. Shape oblate, flattened at base and apex; blossom scar 
moderately conspicuous; ribs prominent, 2-2^ inches broad at the 
medial; furrows broad, moderately deep and smooth. Netting 
abundant, finely laced; cork moderately heavy, distributed uniformly 
over the ribs; interstices moderately deep. Skin color green, 
sparsely mottled with creamy yellow. 

Flesh light green, medium thick, 1 Jj inches; texture moderately 
coarse and fibrous, rather firm, medium juicy; sweet, rather mildly 
flavored, mild aroma; quality fair. Cavity moderately large, 
3 x 3' 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, 'j inch, 
moderately strong and medium tough. 



66 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Christiana. Refs. 4, 12, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 31, 37, 38, 

39, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 53, 55, 56, 90, 91, 96, 97, 
98, 99, 100, 105, 107, 108, 109, 124, 127, 130, 
133, 136, 138, 139, 144, 145. Syns. Boston Pet, 
Boston Sweet, Christiana Improved, Early Christi- 
ana, Early Improved Christiana, Early Orange 
Christiana, Extra Early Orange Christiana, 
Improved Orange Christiana, Mill's Earliest, 
Orange Christiana, Orange Fleshed Christiana. 
The Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1851 
recognized the value of this melon through its premium 
awards for new varieties of merit. Christiana " not yet 
equalled " was raised by Capt. Josiah Lovett of Beverly, 
Massachusetts, from a green Malta, pollinated by a 
very early variety (Netted Nutmeg) and for which the 
society awarded fifty dollars. During the eighties an 
exceptionally fine strain was bred and introduced by 
Dr. E. L. Sturtevant at " Waskakum Farm " at South 
Framingham, Massachusetts. This variety is best 
suited for the home or family garden for to be at its 
best the fruit should be eaten just as it is ready to 
fall off the vine. 

As a moderately early variety Christiana was 4-5 
days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with 
Emerald Gem and about a week later than Fordhook 
and Golden Champlain. The fruits most resemble 
those of Golden Champlain, being somewhat less 
deeply furrowed, less uniformly netted and slightly 
smaller. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines moderately coarse and 
medium slender; branches moderately many. 

Fruit moderately small, 5-5 J 2 x 5-5' 2 inches; weight 2— 2j^ 
pounds. Shape globular, slightly flattened at base and apex; 
blossom scar corky, somewhat raised, rather conspicuous; ribs 
moderately prominent, l?^ inches broad at the medial; furrows 
broad, medium deep and smooth. Netting medium in amount, 
finely interlaced, often in the form of short streaks; cork moderately 
light, unevenly distributed over the ribs; interstices moderately 
shallow. Skin color dull green mottled with golden brown. 

Flesh orange, medium thick, 1}^ inches; texture medium fine, 
slightly fibrous, rather soft and juicy; very sweet, rather highly 
flavored, mild aroma; quality good. Cavity small, 2 ;! i x 2'4 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, ys inch, 
rather weak and tender. 

Citron. Refs. 2, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 30, 38, 44, 45, 

46, 49, 53, 55, 57, 89, 90, 91, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 

105, 127, 130, 133, 134, 136, 138, 139, 142, 145. 

Syns. Citron Nutmeg, Earliest of All, Early 

Citron, Early Green Citron, Extra Early Citron, 

Extra Early Citron Nutmeg, Extra Early Green 

Citron, First in Market, Green, Green Citron, 

Green Citron Nutmeg, Green Fleshed Citron, 

Green Netted Citron, Green Nutmeg, Improved 

Citron, Large Green Citron, Netted Cantaloupe, 

Netted Citron, Netted Green Citron, Netted 

Green Fleshed, Rock Citron. 

Green Citron or Citron was, previous to the eighties, 

perhaps the most popular melon on the market; and 

for cultivation in the family garden, it had few superiors. 

It was included in the very earliest lists, appearing in 

M'Mahon's 1806 American Gardeners catalog, in the 

catalog of Thorburn for 1824 and of Hovey for 1834. 



This variety undoubtedly was used for crossing with 
ether varieties when earliness and quality were desired. 
It was one of the earliest to ripen in the garden and was 
often spoken of as " desirable in the garden till others 
came into condition." 

This is one of the earliest sorts, maturing at Geneva 
a week earlier than Early Prolific Nutmeg, in season 
with Extra Early Hanover, and 2 or 3 days later than 
Early Bird. It is most like Early Prolific Nutmeg but 
is slightly more globular, slightly larger, more finely 
interlaced and more yellowish green in flesh color. It 
is much more globular than Jenny Lind but is similar in 
netting characteristics. 

Plant medium vigorous; vines moderately slender; branches 
few. 

Fruit moderately small, 4*2-5 x 5-5 'J inches; weight 2 • L J-3 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, very slightly flattened at base and 
apex; blossom scar rather conspicuous; ribs rather obscure, l}/£ 
inches broad at the medial; furrows narrow, shallow and smooth. 
Netting sparse, medium finely interlaced; cork light, unevenly dis- 
tributed over the ribs, base and apex; interstices shallow. Skin 
color dull yellowish brown sparsely mottled with green. Flesh 
very light green often with a pale yellowish cast; medium thick, 
1 inch; texture medium coarse, fibrous, soft and juicy; very sweet, 
rather highly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality fair. Cavity 
moderately small, 3 x 2 ' i inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
medium thick, } g inch, rather soft and tender. 

Clark. 

George Tait & Sons, Norfolk, Virginia, offered the 
Clark melon in 1933 as an improved stock of Bottomly. 
Fruits were produced about the same season as Netted 
Gem. In many respects it was very similar to that 
variety and differed chiefly in having a distinctly heavier, 
more cord-like netting and in being somewhat more 
extended at the base. 

Fruit small, 5 J 2-6 x 4-4 1 2 inches; weight 2-2 1 j' pounds. 
Shape oval, base slightly extended, apex rounded; blossom scar 
obscure, ribs prominent, 1 J 2 inches broad at the medial; furrows 
narrow, shallow and smooth, often rather pubescent. Netting 
abundant, finely interlaced; cork very heavy and coarse, distributed 
uniformly over the ribs, base and apex; interstices very deep. Skin 
color dark green becoming dull orange at full maturity. Flesh green, 
thin, J s— 1 inch, texture very coarse and fibrous, soft and juicy; 
sprightly, highly flavored, often strong, nauseous; quality fair to 
poor. Cavity moderately small, 3 > 2 x 2 ' ■> inches, circular in cross- 
section. Rind thick, }i inch, strong and moderately tough. 

Colorado Qiiccn. 

This melon, which is slightly larger than Burrell's 
Gem, was introduced in 1923 by the St. Louis Seed Co., 
St. Louis, Missouri. It is recommended as well suited 
to shipping. 

It is a moderately late variety, 2-3 days earlier than 
Pollock 10-25, in season with Rocky Ford and 4-6 
days later than Burrell's Gem. It is much like Burrell's 
Gem in shape although it is larger, more coarsely inter- 
laced and more orange brown in skin color. The flesh 
is thinner than that of Rocky Ford but otherwise is 
much like it. 

Fruit medium large, 7-7 '2 x 4' 2- 5 inches, weight 3-3 l -> 
pounds. Shape oval, somewhat tapered at the ends; blossom scar 
rather obscure; ribs moderately prominent, l'i inches broad at the 
medial; furrows medium broad, shallow and usually smooth to 
sparsely netted. Netting moderately abundant, medium coarsely 



MUSKMELONS 



67 



interlaced, often streaked in parts: cork moderately light, dis- 
tributed rather uniformly over the ribs, base and apex; interstices 
moderately shallow. Skin color deep yellow to orange brown, 
mottled sparsely with green. Flesh light green, medium thick, 
1 ' , 1 ' j inches; texture rather coarse and fibrous, soft and juicy; 
sweet, rather mildly flavored and faintly aromatic; quality fair. 
Cavity medium large, 4 x 2 ' ; inches, circular in cross-section. 
Rind medium thick, J s inch, rather soft and medium strong. 

Columbus. Refs. 10, 22, 29, 39, 53, 96, 98, 99, 100, 
107, 133. Syns. Beck's Columbus, Christopher 
Columbus, Columbia. Columbus Green, Columbus 
Queen. 

In 1892 A. W. Livingston's Sons, Columbus, Ohio, 
offered this new melon in their novelty list. The seed 
had been secured from a Mr. Antone Beck of Oregon, 
Illinois, who had grown this as his private stock for 
many years. The same year D. Landreth 8s Sons, 
Philadelphia, introduced a melon which they called 
Columbus as " an acclimated foreign melon." The 
descriptions of the two seemed somewhat similar, both 
being oval in shape, silvery green in skin color which 
later changes to golden, heavily netted and green fleshed. 

The Aggeler & Musser Seed Co. of Los Angeles, 
California, offered in 1915 Yellow Fleshed Columbus 
which became quite popular. Later this was said to 
have come from a cross of Columbus and Tip Top. 
Reports indicate that the variety was much like the 
above except in color of flesh and in having superior 
texture. 

Columbus was a late variety about in season with 
Texas Cannon Ball and 4-6 days later than Nixon. 
It was much like Texas Cannon Ball in shape and netting 
and differed from that variety in having a much more 
creamy yellow skin color. The interiors were much the 
same. 

Fruit moderately small, 5'j-6 x 5'_>-6 inches; weight A—4}4 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, somewhat flattened at base and 
apex; blossom scar obscure; ribs and furrows obscure to absent. 
Netting moderately abundant, not interlaced very much, usually 
short streaked and in star-like formations, rather obscure because 
of skin color similarity; cork light, rather unevenly distributed 
over the surface. Skin color creamy buff. Flesh green, moderately 
thin, 1-lli inches; texture rather coarse and fibrous, firm, medium 
juicy; moderately sweet, highly flavored and mildly aromatic; 
quality fair to moderately good. Cavity small, 2J4 x lYl inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, J 4 inch, tough and strong. 

Cosmopolitan. Refs. 29, 53, 54, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 105, 128, 133, 136, 140. Syns. Cannon Ball, 
" Silver Netted," Texas Cannon Ball. 
D. M. Ferry & Co., Detroit, Michigan, introduced in 
1894 a variety which they called Cosmopolitan. The 
new variety was selected at the Ferry Oakview trial 
grounds from Shumway's Silver Netted Cantaloupe. 
This variety, Silver Netted, had been listed for several 
years by R. H. Shumway of Rcckford, Illinois, and was 
said to have come from a cross between an American 
muskmelon and a French cantaloupe. Ferry chose the 
name because the new selection had been originally 
derived from cosmopolitan parentage. W. Atlee Burpee 
listed Cosmopolitan in 1896, and in 1897 offered a new 
strain called Cannon Ball. In 1897 L. Templin of Calla, 



Ohio, introduced Texas Cannon Ball as a novelty from 
Texas. This latter name is the name by which the 
type is generally known today. 

Cosmopolitan is a late variety which matured at 
Geneva in season with Montreal Market and Giant and 
4 or 5 days later than Nixon and Pollock 10-25. It is 
very similar to Texas Cannon Ball and Silver Netted, 
two varieties which were originally individual but in 
late years have been more or less indiscriminately mixed. 
The fruits are shaped much the same as those of Nixon, 
and differ from that variety in being more nearly globular, 
slightly larger, with the netting less abundant and inter- 
laced and more inclined to be circular in pattern at the 
ends. The flesh is slightly more firm and lacks the 
orange tint about the cavity present in Nixon. 

Plant vigorous; vines heavy and coarse; branches many. 

Fruit medium large, 6— 6 1 i x 6-6'j inches; weight 3 ' j— 4 
pounds. Shape perfectly globular, base and apex very slightly 
flattened; blossom scar usually obscure; ribs and furrows absent. 
Netting rather sparse, short streaked and checked in star-like 
pattern, often circular at the ends; cork medium light, unevenly 
distributed over the surface; interstices moderately shallow. Skin 
color dark green, assuming bronze green at full maturity. Flesh 
light green; moderately thick, 1} z~l% inches; texture medium coarse 
and fibrous, firm and rather juicy; sweet, rather mildly flavored and 
mildly aromatic; quality fair. Cavity medium large, 3x3 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, J 4 inch, moderately strong 
and tough. 

Daisy. Refs. 54, 121. 

This melon which was introduced in 1913 by Henry 
Field Seed Co., Shenandoah, Iowa, was probably a 
selection out of Emerald Gem for a larger and more 
globular fruit. The originator, Alfred Apfel, a market 
gardener in the northern part of Iowa, had found that 
it was apparently blight proof and grew well under 
drought conditions. D. M. Ferry & Co. from 1926 to 
1933 offered Daisy as a melon whose quality " is the 
standard of excellence in muskmelons." 

This is a moderately early to midseason sort about 
3 or 4 days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with 
Sugar Rock and about a week later than Emerald Gem. 
In form and skin color it most resembles Emerald Gem. 
It differs from that variety in being more globular, less 
furrowed, less netted, and in retaining the green skin 
color much later, even past the full slip stage of maturity. 
The flesh is decidedly thicker in proportion to its size 
than in other varieties and is surpassed by few if any in 
all round quality. 

Plant vigorous grower; vines moderately slender; branches 
medium in number; leaves distinctly crumpled. 

Fruit moderately small, 5*2-6 x 5-5 ' _. inches; weight 2 1 -j-3 1 2 
pounds. Shape nearly globular; base and apex rounded and full, 
blossom scar rather conspicuous; ribs obscure, 1 ' _> inches broad at the 
medial; furrows narrow, very shallow and smooth. Netting rather 
sparse, moderately fine interlaced; cork light, unevenly distributed 
over the ribs; interstices very shallow. Skin color dark and rather 
glossy green, very sparsely mottled with pale yellowish brown 
when fully mature. Flesh deep orange to salmon orange, moder- 
ately thick, 1 ] •_'- 1 3 4 inches; texture moderately fine, firm, moder- 
ately juicy; rather sweet, highly flavored, mild aroma, quality very 
good. Cavity very small, 2\i x 1 3 4 inches, distinctly triangular 
in cross-section. Rind thin, ys inch, moderately strong and medium 
tough. 



68 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Delicious. Refs. 37, 54, 95, 121. Syns. Extra Selected 
Delicious, Golden Delicious. 

Delicious was introduced in 1925 by Chas. J. Lind- 
holm, Minneapolis, Minnesota, as Golden Delicious. 
Jerome B. Rice Seed Co., Cambridge, New York, and 
Joseph Harris Company, Coldwater, New York, offered 
it as Delicious in 1930, and in 1935 Mr. Lindholm also 
dropped the word " Golden " from the title. Delicious 
is best described as an early strain of the famous Bender 
from which it was selected and which it resembles in many 
ways. For the home garden and local trade it has a 
very definite place in the list of varieties. 

This is a moderately early variety about 5 or 6 days 
earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with Extra Early 
Hackensack and Extra Early Osage and about a week 
later than Golden Champlain. It is most like Bender 
and differs from that variety in being smaller, less deeply 
furrowed, more finely netted and in having a much less 
prominent blossom scar. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and medium heavy; 
branches moderately many. 

Fruit medium large, 6} >~7 x 6-6 ' 2 inches; weight 4-5 pounds. 
Shape nearly globular to short oval; base full; apex even; blossom 
scar rather obscure; ribs slightly prominent, 2 inches across the 
medial; furrows narrow, moderately shallow and smooth. Netting 
moderately abundant, rather finely laced; cork moderately light, 
distributed rather uniformly over the ribs; interstices moderately 
shallow. Skin color pale creamy yellow. Flesh orange, medium 
thick, 1 ' 4 — 1 ] 2 inches; texture moderately fine, slightly fibrous, 
moderately soft and juicy; sweet, mildly flavored, pleasant aroma; 
quality good. Cavity moderately small, 3'^ x 2 l -> inches, circular 
in cross-section. Rind thick, 34 inch, moderately strong, medium 
tough. 

Delmonico. Refs. 4, 38, 40, 53, 83, 84, 88, 89, 91, 92, 
98, 99, 100, 101, 106, 107, 125, 127, 128, 133, 144. 

Named for Delmonico, the famous New York caterer, 
this melon was introduced in 1889 by Peter Henderson 
& Co. The original seed came from Waterloo, 
Nebraska, a section which at that time produced a large 
proportion of the vine seeds grown in this country. The 
Perfected Delmonico which came out nearly ten years 
later was a smaller melon more globular than the original 
Delmonico. 

Delmonico was similar in shape and size to Osage, 
but differed from that variety in being decidedly heavier 
netted and having narrower, more uniformly netted ribs. 
It differs from Perfected Delmonico in being larger, 
much more oblong in shape, more heavily netted and 
more prominently ribbed. 

Fruit moderately large, 7 J 2 _ 8 x 5)4-6 inches; weight 4-5 
pounds. Shape oval, slightly tapered at the apex; blossom scar 
obscure, ribs moderately prominent, l^-l^ inches broad at the 
medial; furrows narrow, moderately shallow, netted. Netting 
abundant, uniformly and moderately coarse interlaced; cork moder- 
ately heavy and evenly distributed over the surface; interstices 
moderately deep. Skin color light orange yellow, rather green 
along the furrows. Flesh salmon orange; moderately thin, 1-1 '., 
inches; texture fine, firm, moderately juicy; moderately sweet, fair 
flavor, quality medium good. Cavity large, 4x3 inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind thick, ' t —K inch, moderately tough and strong. 

Early Bird. 

This is an early, yellow-meated sort that was first 
offered in 1930 by the Iowa Seed Co., Des Moines, Iowa. 



It is one of the very earliest melons at Geneva, 
maturing in season with Citron and Extra Early Hanover 
and about a week earlier than Fordhook and Jenny 
Lind. It most resembles Extra Early Hanover in 
shape, although it differs from that variety in flesh 
color, and is larger, more symmetrical and more uniformly 
netted. During wet years, Early Bird is rather suscep- 
tible to blossom-end cracking and for this reason has not 
been widely grown. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately slender, branches many. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6 '2 x 5-5' 2 inches; weight 2' .', 
pounds. Shape very short oval to nearly globular; base full; apex 
even, somewhat inclined to crack, blossom scar rather conspicuous; 
ribs slightly prominent, l 1 j-l :, 1 inches broad at the medial; fur- 
rows moderately narrow, rather shallow and netted. Netting 
abundant, moderately fine laced; cork moderately heavy, distributed 
over the entire fruit; interstices medium deep. Skin color green, 
sparsely mottled with golden brown at full maturity. Flesh orange, 
medium thick, \}i inches; texture medium fine, slightly fibrous, 
rather soft and juicy; sweet, rather highly flavored, mild aroma; 
quality good. Cavity moderately small, 2 ' 2 x 2)4 inches, triangular 
in cross-section. Rind moderately thick, £g inch, moderately 
weak. 

Edward's Perfecto. Refs. 15, 36, 54, 58, 64, 65, 79, 
81, 105, 109, 110. Syns. Improved Perfecto, 
Improved Pink Meat, Orange Flesh, Orange 
Flesh Perfecto, Orange Flesh Superba, Perfected 
Perfecto, Perfecto, Superfecto. 
This melon was developed from the Rocky Ford 
Eden Gem by J. R. Edwards of Rocky Ford, Colorado. 
Seed was offered by Ross Bros. Seed Co., Wichita, Kansas, 
in 1920, by Livingston in 1923, and by Burrell and 
Vaughan in 1924. This type of melon which was 
developed during the period of great expansion of the 
melon shipping business was only another step toward 
the ideal. Mr. Edwards continued selection work 
and from his stocks came other leading strains of ship- 
ping melons. The Superfecto offered first in 1926 
came as the result of further selection by D. V. Burrell. 
The Perfected Perfecto and Improved Perfecto represent 
the most outstanding and leading strains of today. 
All of these selections had as an object a heavily netted, 
non-ribbed type with thick flesh of a delightful salmon- 
orange color and a very small seed cavity. 

It is a moderately late variety maturing at Geneva 
4-6 days earlier than Texas Cannon ball, and 3-4 days 
later than Hale's Best. The fruits are somewhat more 
oval and slightly larger than Pollock 10-25 and very 
much like Hale's Best in shape and character of netting. 
The flesh is deeper orange than Hale's Best and usually 
not as thick, otherwise they are difficult to distinguish. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines moderately slender; branches 
moderately few. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6)2 x 5-5 Vi inches; weight 2 '2-3 
pounds. Shape short oval to nearly globular, symmetrical, rounded 
at base and apex; blossom scar obscure; ribs and furrows absent. 
Netting abundant, moderately fine laced; cork medium heavy, 
distributed uniformly over the surface; interstices medium deep. 
Skin color dark green. Flesh salmon orange; medium thick, 
1 ' 1 1 ' _> inches, texture fine, fiberless, moderately firm and juicy; 
sweet, rather highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality good. 
Cavity moderately small, 3x2 inches, triangular in cross-section. 
Rind medium thick, ) \ inch, strong and tough. 



MUSKMELONS 



69 



Emerald Gem. Refs. 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 15, 22, 23, 25, 26, 

27, 29, 33, 37, 38, 39, 41, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 58, 

62, 69, 70, 75, 79, 83, 84, 88, 89, 91, 95, 96, 97, 98, 

99, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 121, 

123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 133, 136, 140, 141, 142, 

143. 144. Syns. Early Emerald Gem, Emerald 

Green, Giant Wonder Gem, Improved Emerald 

Gem, Mary Daisy. 

The Emerald Gem melon was a chance seedling 

obtained by Win. G. Voorhees of Benzie County, 

Michigan, who sent seed to W. Atlee Burpee. Named 

and introduced by this company in 1886, it soon became 

the most popular melon of that period. Melons indeed 

seemed to call forth words of praise unsuited to any 

other vegetable and the quality cf this melon soon was 

admitted to be " unequalled in rich, delicious flavor " 

or " altogether unapproached in delicious flavor and 

luscious beyond description." Today Emerald Gem is 

known as one of the best second early varieties for home 

garden planting. 

This is a moderately early variety, maturing at 
Geneva 6-7 days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in 
season with Delicious and Extra Early Hackensack, and 
about a week later than Golden Champlain. The 
fruits are less globular than Golden Champlain, distinctly 
less ribbed and very much less netted. It is much 
like Daisy in the immature stage, being less globular 
and as maturity is approached assumes a decidedly more 
brownish green appearance. 

Plant moderately weak; vines slender; branches medium in 
number. 

Fruit small, 4 — I 1 2 x 5-5 ' 2 inches; weight 2J L > _ 3 pounds. 
Shape nearly globular, slightly flattened at base and apex, blossom 
scar cork-like, rather conspicuous; ribs moderately prominent, 
1 '4-1 ' 2 inches broad at the medial; furrows narrow, medium deep 
and smooth. Netting very sparse, usually irregularly streaked, 
often patchy, moderately fine interlaced; cork very light, distributed 
unevenly over the ribs, base and apex; interstices very shallow. 
Skin color green, profusely mottled with brownish orange at full 
maturity. Flesh pale orange, medium thick, 1-1 } ■>' inches; texture 
fine, soft and juicy; sweet, somewhat spicy, mild aroma; quality 
good. Cavity small, 2 • 2 x 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
medium thick, } s inch, rather weak and tender. 

Enid. 

The Gurney Seed Co., Yankton, South Dakota, in 
1908 introduced the Enid muskmelon. The name came 
from the town of Enid, Oklahoma, where the new variety 
originated. It was described as " one-half larger than 
Rocky Ford, one week earlier and twice as good." 

Extra Early Grand Rapids. Refs. 53, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 105, 114, 133, 140. Syns. Early Grand 
Rapids, Early Grand Rapids Market, Extra Early 
Grand Rapids Market, Grand Rapids, Grand 
Rapids Market, New Grand Rapids. 
Introduced in 1895 by Wm. Henry Maule, Phila- 
delphia, Grand Rapids was favorably received because of 
its earliness. The original seed came from market 
gardeners near Grand Rapids. Michigan. There were 
two types of the Grand Rapids, the majority of the 
fruits were oblong but nearly one-fourth of the fruits 
were nearly round. In later years the longer type has 



prevailed but because of lack of quality the variety has 
gradually been replaced by better sorts. 

This was a moderately early variety which matured 
about 5-6 days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season 
with Delicious and 6-8 days later than Golden Cham- 
plain. It resembled Burrell's Gem in shape, but was 
somewhat more oval at the ends, less profusely and 
uniformly netted, and had a skin much lighter in color. 

Fruit moderately small, 6 :t i-7 x 4 3 .|— 5 inches; weight 2)2-3 
pounds. Shape oblong, moderately tapering at both ends; blossom 
scar conspicuous, corky; ribs moderately prominent, l'l-l,^ inches 
broad at the medial; furrows broad, medium deep and smooth. 
Netting moderately abundant, medium finely interlaced, often 
streaked; cork rather light, distributed rather evenly over the ribs, 
base and apex; interstices moderately shallow. Skin color creamy 
yellow, sparsely mottled with bronze green. Flesh orange, moder- 
ately thin, 1-1 'i inches; texture coarse and fibrous, medium soft 
and juicy: sweet, rather mildly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
fair to moderately good. Cavity moderately large, 4 ' j x 2 ' j inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind moderately thin, ) g inch, medium 
soft and slightly tough. 

Extra Early Hackensack. Refs. 4, 15, 22, 29, 53, 58, 

62, 64, 79, 83, 88, 91, 92, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 
108, 109, 125, 133, 136, 140, 141, 143, 144, 146. 
Syns. Early Hackensack, Early Jersey Hacken- 
sack, Extra Early Improved Hackensack, Im- 
proved Early Hackensack, Large Early Hacken- 
sack, New Early Hackensack. 
A few years after the Hackensack melon was gen- 
erally distributed throughout the country, Peter Hender- 
son & Co. offered a new strain which was a week to 
ten days earlier than the parent. The first selection was 
made about 1884 by a grower in the Hackensack, New 
Jersey, garden district. Henderson placed the seed in 
trial and after four years proved its earliness. It has 
become the standard green-fleshed early melon for home 
gardeners and truckers in that area. 

It is a moderately early variety maturing about 6-8 
days earlier than Hackensack, in season with Netted 
Gem and 6-8 days later than Early Green Nutmeg. 
The fruits are much like those of Hackensack but are 
smaller, more uniformly ribbed and have a trifle finer 
interlaced netting. The interior is the same in all 
respects, although Extra Early Hackensack is believed 
to have somewhat better quality. 

Extra Early Hanover. Ref. 133. 

Extra Early Hanover was introduced in 1895 by 
T. W. Woods 8b Sons of Richmond, Virginia. The 
variety originated in the vicinity of Richmond and its 
listing as an early sort has continued to the present. 
It is reported to have attained " immense popularity " 
and in the region of its origin, is noted for the sweet 
and sugary flavor of the flesh which can be eaten to the 
very thin skin. 

It is one of the very earliest melons grown at Geneva, 
coming in season with Early Bird and Citron, and about 
a week earlier than Fordhook and Jenny Lind. In 
shape it most resembles Citron, although it is much less 
uniform, more inclined to be lopsided and more evenly 
netted than that variety. It is distinctly more oblate 



70 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



than Early Bird and usually more coarsely and much less 
uniformly netted. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines moderately slender; branches 
moderately few. 

Fruit small, 4 ! _>-5 x 5-5 '_> inches; weight 2-2 } i pounds. 
Shape oblate, often somewhat lopsided; blossom scar moderately 
conspicuous; ribs moderately prominent, irregular in width; furrows 
medium broad, irregular in depth, often netted. Netting medium 
in amount, rather coarsely and irregularly interlaced over the ribs; 
cork moderately heavy, irregularly distributed; interstices medium 
deep. Skin color brownish yellow, sparsely mottled with green. 
Flesh light green, blending to greenish yellow toward the cavity, 
thin, : ! 4~1 inch; texture moderately coarse and slightly fibrous, 
soft and juicy; slightly sweet, poorly flavored, aroma lacking, 
quality poor. Cavity moderately small, 3 x 2 ] 4 inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind thick, J 4 inch, rather weak and tender. 

Extra Early Osage. Refs. 37, 58, 79, 105, 109. Syns. 
Extra Early Osage Gem, Osage Early. 

This variety was offered in 1907 by D. M. Ferry 
& Co., Detroit, as a " Special strain of Osage selected 
particularly for earliness." Inasmuch as the Osage 
melon was such a popular sort, the shortening of the 
period necessary to reach maturity was of great interest 
to growers in all regions. 

It is a moderately early variety, about 6-8 days 
earlier than Osage, in season with Delicious, and 3-4 
days later than Golden Champlain. It most resembles 
Osage in shape and skin cclcr; however, it is smaller 
and mere profusely netted than that variety. Many 
consider it distinctly superior to Osage in quality. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6 '2 x 5-5 ] 2 inches; weight 3 '2—* 
pounds. Shape short oval to nearly globular, base full and slightly 
enlarged; apex even, blossom scar obscure; ribs moderately promi- 
nent, 1 J 2 inches broad at the medial; furrows distinct, narrow, 
medium depth and smooth. Netting moderately abundant, rather 
coarsely interlaced, often streaked in places; cork moderately light 
and distributed rather evenly over the ribs; interstices medium deep. 
Skin color dark green mottled with grayish green, particularly 
along the furrows, becoming mottled with yellowish brown at full 
maturity. Flesh salmon orange, moderately thick, 1 ] 2-1 3 4 inches; 
texture moderately fine, very slightly fibrous, moderately soft and 
juicy; sweet, rather highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality 
very good. Cavity moderately small, 3 x 2 l i inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind medium thick, , ] 5 inch, medium strong and 
rather tender. 

Extra Early Sunrise. 

This is a new melon offered in 1934 by C. J. Lindholm 
of Minneapolis, Minnesota. It is an early variety 
maturing 3-4 days earlier than Delicious, in season with 
Golden Champlain, and 4-6 days later than Early Bird. 
The fruits are more oval and less ribbed than those of 
Delicious, but the character cf the netting and the color 
of the skin are very much the same. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately heavy; branches moderately 
many. 

Fruit medium large, 6-7 x 5-6 inches; weight 3-3 ] 2 pounds. 
Shape short oval, symmetrical, base and apex full; blossom scar 
conspicuous, corky; ribs slightly prominent, 1 4 inches broad at the 
medial; furrows very narrow, shallow and usually smooth. Netting 
medium abundant, coarsely interlaced; cork moderately heavy, 
distributed rather uniformly over the ribs and occasionally on the 
furrows; interstices medium deep. Skin color creamy yellow, very 
sparsely mottled with very pale green. Flesh orange; moderately 
thick. nches; texture s'ightly coarse and fibrous, soft and 

juicy; sweet, rather highly flavored, and mildly aromatic; quality 



good. Cavity medium large, 3 } 2 x 2 ' 2 inches, circular in cross- 
section. Rind thick, 'j-;' * inch, medium strong and medium tough. 

Fordhook. Refs. 15, 54, 58, 69, 79, 95, 105, 109, 136. 
Syns. Early Fcrdhock, New Fcrdhcck, Scndereg- 
ger's Earliest, Sweet Martha, Yellow Fleshed 
Jenny Lind. 
The Fordhcck melon came from a cress between 
Emerald Gem and Improved Jenny Lind made by A. P. 
Owen, Cedar Dale Farm, Mickletcn, New Jersey. The 
original cress was made about 1901, and in 1908 W. Atlee 
Burpee introduced the variety showing a fine cclcr plate 
and devoting a full page to extolling its merits. It has 
proved to be one of the best of the small early orange- 
fleshed muskmelcns. 

As an early variety it usually precedes Gclden 
Champlain by 2 or 3 days, but is 3 or 4 days later than 
Early Bird or Citron. The fruits are smaller and more 
oblate than those cf Golden Champlain as well as 
being more coarsely netted. In many respects it 
resembles Jenny Lind, but the color of flesh and the 
fineness of the netting in the latter variety serves to 
distinguish the two. The fact that it has cften been 
called a yellow-fleshed Jenny Lind will serve to indicate 
their similarity in exterior appearance. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines moderately slender; branches 
moderately few. 

Fruit moderately small, 4-5 x 5-6 inches; weight 1 J £—2 pounds. 
Shape definitely oblate, blossom scar corky, conspicuous; ribs 
moderately prominent, 1-1 l 2 inches broad at the medial; furrows 
narrow, medium deep and smooth. Netting moderately abundant, 
moderately fine interlaced; cork heavy, rather uniformly distributed 
over the ribs, base and apex; interstices moderately deep. Skin 
color dull yellowish brown profusely mottled with green. Flesh 
orange, moderately thin, 1-1 } 4' inches; texture slightly coarse and 
fibrous, moderately firm, juicy: sweet and rather highly flavored; 
quality good. Cavity moderately small, 2x3 inches, nearly 
circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, ,'> -1 4 inch, moder- 
ately soft and rather weak. 

Giant. Refs. 4, 9, 22, 29, 53, 89, 92, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
105, 125, 127, 133, 142. Syns. Enormous, 
Mammcth Giant, Market King, Michell's Deli- 
cious, Mill's Giant, New Giant, Salmon Giant, 
Shumway's Giant, Thcrburn's Giant, Western 
Giant. 
The date cf the original introduction of this melon 
is not definitely known. However, it is listed in the 
catalogs of James J. H. Gregory for 1895 under the 
name " Shumway's Giant." In catalogs of 1892 Thor- 
burn and Livingston describe a melon under the name 
New Giant which probably was the same variety. It 
was described as the " largest melon ever introduced, with 
the average size of the fruits as large as a water bucket." 
The variety is known today as the largest pink-meated 
sort, suited more for the home garden than for shipping. 
This is one cf the latest varieties, maturing in season 
with Texas Cannon Ball and Weaver Special, 2 or 3 days 
later than Montreal Market and a week to 10 days later 
than Bender's Surprise. It is shaped much like Montreal 
Market but is decidedly less netted and scmewhat less 
deeply furrowed. The flesh is lighter crange than that 
of Bender's Surprise and is decidedly drier and less 







-»• ' 



?v, 



•-■#<. 




»~>< 









MUSKMELONS 



71 



desirable. It is the largest melon of all but its exceed- 
ingly poor eating and keeping qualities restrict its use 
under New York conditions. 

Plant very vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches very 
many. 

Fruit very large, 8-9 x 9-10 inches; weight 12-15 pounds. 
Shape oblate to nearly globular, base usually depressed, apex even; 
blossom scar large and conspicuous; ribs very prominent, 3 inches 
broad at the medial; furrows narrow, deep and smooth. Netting 
very sparse, usually streaked, somewhat circular at the base; cork 
very light, unevenly distributed over the ribs and the base; interstices 
very shallow. Skin color pale grayish green, turning to pale buff 
yellow at full maturity. Flesh pale orange; thick, l :i 4-2 inches; 
texture medium fine, rather granular and mealy, soft and juicy; 
moderately sweet, poorly flavored and very slightly aromatic, 
quality fair to poor. Cavity very large, 4x4 inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind medium thick, :! s inch, soft and weak. 

Gold Coin. Refs. 58, 109. Syn. Bowman's Gold Coin. 

Wm. Henry Maule of Philadelphia offered his 
customers seed of this new melon in 1900. It was called 
to Mr. Maule's attention through the interest of T. 
Greiner of La Salle, New York, editor of the Practical 
Farmer. A subscriber, Mr. Bowman, had discovered 
the melon 2 years earlier on his farm in Niagara County. 
It was supposed to have come from a cross between 
Emerald Gem and Acme. Early descriptions indicate 
that the stock was somewhat mixed but that the better 
melons were somewhat like Paul Rose. 

It is a moderately early variety, 4-6 days earlier 
than Paul Rose, in season with Delicious and 8-10 days 
later than Early Bird. It is much like Paul Rose in 
shape, although fruits are slightly larger, more promi- 
nently ribbed and more coarsely interlaced than that 
variety. 

Fruit medium large, 6' 2-7 X 5 '2-6 inches; weight 3 ] i-4 
pounds. Shape oval, base slightly enlarged, apex full; blossom scar 
obscure; ribs prominent, l 3 ^ inches broad at the medial; furrows 
broad, medium deep and smooth. Netting moderately abundant, 
medium finely interlaced; cork heavy, distributed rather evenly 
over the ribs, often rather streaked at the ends; interstices moder- 
ately deep. Skin color orange brown mottled with green. Flesh 
orange, moderately thin, l's-l'-^ inches, texture medium coarse 
and fibrous, soft and juicy; sweet, rather highly flavored and mildly 
aromatic; quality moderately good. Cavity large, 4J^ x 3 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, Jg-Ji inch, medium 
strong and moderately tough. 

Golden Champlain. Refs. 27, 36, 37, 54, 58, 78, 79, 
109, 121, 123. Syns. Champlain, Discovery, 
Earliana, Earliest, Golden Lake Champlain, 
Skagit Golden. 
The development of Golden Champlain somewhat 
parallels that of Rocky Ford, Bender and Hale's Best. 
This variety as offered today is very similar to that of 
the original introduction in 1923; but the present stock 
represents certain progressive changes. " H. J. Walrath, 
the originator of Lake Champlain, continued his improve- 
ment work and in 1920 took pollen from Gold Nugget, 
previously known as Admiral Togo, and placed it on 
blossoms of Lake Champlain plants." Three years later 
seed was listed under the variety name Golden Cham- 
plain, as an improved Lake Champlain with deeper 
golden flesh. 



This is an early variety which matured at Geneva 
a week or ten days earlier than Bender's Surprise, about 
in season with Fordhook and about a week later than 
Early Bird. The fruits most resemble those of Ford- 
hook, being larger, more globular in shape, and less 
coarsely netted. In form they are decidedly more 
globular than Early Bird, more prominently ribbed and 
more deeply furrowed. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines slender, branches medium 
number. 

Fruit moderately small, 5-6 x 5-6 inches; weight 3-4 pounds. 
Shape nearly globular, slightly flattened at base and apex; blossom 
scar usually not conspicuous; ribs slightly prominent, 1}^ inches 
broad at the medial; furrows narrow, moderately shallow and 
smooth. Netting moderately abundant, rather finely interlaced; 
cork moderately heavy, somewhat irregularly distributed over the 
ribs and the ends; interstices medium deep. Skin color yellowish 
brown, profusely mottled with green. Flesh pale orange, medium 
thick, 1 J 4 — 1 ' 2 inches; texture medium fine, slightly fibrous, moder- 
ately soft and juicy; sweet and medium flavor; quality moderately 
good. Cavity moderately small, 3 x 2 l ■> inches, circular in cross- 



section. Rind moderately thick, 
rather weak. 



4 inch, moderately firm but 



Golden Combination. Refs. 37, 121. Syn. Aristocrat. 

The name of this new variety was chosen by the 
originator, J. W. Conrad of Rockbridge, Ohio, because 
of its origin as a cross between two other golden-fleshed 
varieties. Mr. Conrad in a letter stated that he had 
a number of varieties in a trial and that possibly Tip 
Top and Banquet were the parents. Nature made 
the cross and Mr. Conrad selected large fruits with 
thick orange meat, until locally the strain was known as 
" that thick meated melon." Stark Bros., Louisiana, 
Missouri, introduced it in 1927. Seed was offered in 1935 
by C. J. Lindholm and in 1934 by Joseph Harris Com- 
pany of Coldwater, New York, who had been making 
selections over a number of years to develop a more uni- 
form stock. It is one of the most promising of the 
newer varieties. 

This is a moderately late variety, maturing at 
Geneva 4 or 5 days later than Bender's Surprise, in 
season with Hale's Best and about 4 or 5 days earlier 
than Montreal Market. The fruits are fully as large as 
Bender's Surprise, but are more globular, distinctly less 
deeply furrowed and have a thinner grayish green skin as 
contrasted with the pale creamy yellow skin of the 
Bender. The flesh is thicker and equally as good, if not 
better in texture and flavor. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately heavy; branches moderately 
many. 

Fruit large, 7 '9-8 x 7-8 inches; weight 6-7 pounds. Shape 
globular to short oval; base and apex rounded to slightly flattened, 
blossom scar conspicuous; ribs moderately prominent, 2-2 J 2 inches 
broad at the medial; furrows medium broad, moderately shallow 
and netted. Netting abundant, very coarsely interlaced, often 
circular in pattern at the base and apex; cork broad and heavy, 
usually creased, distributed uniformly over the entire fruit; interstices 
moderately deep. Skin color distinctly grayish green, sparsely 
mottled with pale yellow very late in maturity. Flesh orange, very 
thick, 2 2' t inches; texture moderately fine, slightly fibrous, soft 
and very juicy; sweet, rather highly flavo-ed with pleasant aroma; 
quality very good. Cavity moderately large, 3 1 2 x 3 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thin, J 5-fV inch, rather weak and 
tender. 



"2 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Golden Cream. 

This melon was first offered in 1923 by Gill Bros. 
Seed Co., Portland, Oregon. Little is known of the 
history of the variety. 

This is a moderately early variety, about 5 or 6 
days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with 
Delicious and Extra Early Osage and about a week later 
than Fordhook. The fruits are most like Extra Early 
Osage in shape but differ from that variety in having 
much less but coarser netting and a distinctly pale 
creamy yellow (instead of dark brownish green) skin. 
The flesh is thicker, rather lighter orange in color and 
more distinctly flavored. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines moderately coarse; branches few. 

Fruit medium large, 7-7 ' -j x 5-5 ] 2 inches; weight 3 ] _>^t 
pounds. Shape nearly ovate, base slightly enlarged; blossom scar 
obscure; ribs absent; furrows absent. Netting moderately sparse, 
very coarsely interlaced, often streaked without cross lacing; cork 
moderately light, distributed unevenly over the surface; interstices 
shallow. Skin color creamy yellow. Flesh pale pinkish orange; 
moderately thick, 1 1 2-1 3 4 inches; texture very fine, not fibrous, 
moderately soft and juicy; moderately sweet, somewhat sprightly 
and acid, rather highly flavored and rather pleasantly aromatic; 
quality fair; cavity moderately small, 3U x 2^' inches; triangular 
in cross-section. Rind medium thick, Hr~M inch, rather weak and 
tender. 

Golden Eagle. Refs. 29, 53, 69, 97, 99, 100, 101, 109, 
133, 140. 

Golden Eagle, introduced in 1898 by W. Atlee 
Burpee, was a rather attractive melon yet never became 
exceedingly popular, possibly because of the many new 
sorts which were being offered about that time. 

It is a midseason variety, maturing about 4-6 
days earlier than Hale's Best, in season with Golden 
Queen and Bender's Surprise, and 6 8 days later than 
Emerald Gem. It is similar in shape to Hale's Best, 
being more coarsely netted and more deeply furrowed. 
The skin and flesh color is much like that of Emerald 
Gem at full maturity. Oblate-shaped fruits, very much 
like Greeley Wonder in type, occasionally appear. 

Fruit moderately small, 5^-6 x 4j£-4?4 inches; weight 
2-2 }/o pounds. Shape oval, base very slightly extended; apex 
rounded; blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly prominent, l'2- ,3 4 
inches broad at the medial; furrows narrow, moderately shallow 
and finely netted or streaked. Netting medium abundant, rather 
coarsely interlaced, usually predominating in short longitudinal 
streaks which are barely intertwined; cork medium heavy and rather 
uniformly distributed over the ribs, base and apex. Skin color 
dark green moderately blotched with dull orange buff at full 
maturity. Flesh orange, moderately thin, I'v-lVj inches; texture 
rather coarse and somewhat fibrous, moderately soft and juicy; 
sweet, rather mildly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality fair. 
Cavity moderately small, 3x2 inches, triangular in cross-section. 
Rind thick, '4 inch, medium strong and rather tough. 

Golden Osage. Syn. New Golden Osage. 

New Golden Osage was an introduction in 1933 of 
Chas. J. Lindholm of Minneapolis, Minnesota. Little 
is known concerning the history of the variety, other than 
that it represents a strain of Osage selected for superior 
qualities. It has continued to be popular in the Min- 
neapolis section and undoubtedly has merit. 

This is a midseason variety which matures 2 or 3 
days earlier than Osage, in season with Sugar Rock and 



4-6 days later than Extra Early Osage. It is similar in 
shape to Osage, although somewhat less enlarged at the 
base. The skin color is a more creamy yellow than in 
that variety and is more like that of Bender's Surprise, as 
is the character of the netting. 

Fruit medium large, 7-7 J 2 x 5-5 'j inches; weight 3 ' ^ — 4 
pounds. Shape oval, base full and slightly extended; apex even; 
blossom scar conspicuous; ribs obscure, l l > inches broad at the 
medial; furrows broad, very shallow and smooth. Netting moder- 
ately abundant, coarsely interlaced; cork medium heavy, unevenly 
distributed over the ribs, base and apex; interstices moderately 
shallow. Skin color creamy yellow. Flesh pale orange, medium 
thick, IJ4-I ' ■> inches; texture medium coarse and moderately 
fibrous, medium firm and juicy; sweet, mildly flavored and mildly 
aromatic; quality good. Cavity medium large, 4x2 inches, circular 
in cross-section. Rind thick, J4— ^ ^ inch, rather soft and tender. 

Golden Oval. Ref. 121. 

The G. H. Wilson Seed Co. of Downs, Kansas, has 
during the last few years introduced several new varieties 
of muskmelons. These include Black African, Wilson 
Black, Solomon Giant, Ivory Wonder, Perfect, and 
Mammoth Black Oak. Of those tested at Geneva, 
the Golden Oval seems the most promising. It is 
claimed to be a hybrid coming from a cross between 
Pollock 10-25 and Shumway's Giant. Its partial resist- 
ance to melon mosaic is of interest. 

It is a midseason variety, maturing 4-6 days earlier 
than Golden Combination, in season with Hearts O'Gold, 
and 6-8 days later than Delicious. To some extent it 
resembles Hale's Best in shape, but is somewhat more 
enlarged at the base and tapered at the apex. The 
netting on most of the fruits is lighter and more finely 
interlaced than on Hale's Best, although on some it is 
heavier and more coarsely interlaced. It is fully as 
thick-fleshed and of equal quality. Its tendency to 
split, however, will limit its area of adaptability. 

Plant very vigorous; vines moderately heavy and coarse; 
branches moderately many. 

Fruit medium large, 6-7 x 5 1 2-6 inches; weight 3-3 ' 2 pounds. 
Shape short oval, symmetrical, base slightly enlarged and full; 
blossom scar rather prominent. Ribs rather obscure, 1 3 4 inches 
broad at medial; furrows narrow, very shallow and netted. Netting 
abundant, rather finely interlaced, about 40 per cent of fruits have 
coarsely interlaced net which is often streaked; cork medium heavy 
and distributed uniformly over the surface; interstices moderately 
shallow. Skin color creamy yellow. Flesh orange; moderately 
thick, I 3 ,,— l ; 'v inches; texture fine, slightly fibrous, firm, juicy; 
sweet, very highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic: quality very 
good. Cavity moderately small, 3 x 2 ' 2 inches, circular in cross- 
section. Rind moderately thin, ' g inch, strong and tough. 

Grand. Ref. 136. Syns. Davis Grand, Improved 
Davis Grand. 

Horace B. Davis of Leoni Township, Jackson 
County, Michigan, discovered a single plant in a field 
of Osage melons which produced fruits several days 
earlier than and slightly different in color from the 
genuine Osage. It was named the Grand and in 1907 
distributed by S. M. Isbell & Co., Jackson, Michigan, and 
by the Livingston Seed Co., Columbus, Ohio. For nearly 
twenty years it was one of the leading varieties grown 
in Michigan but was never widely grown in other districts. 

It was a moderately early variety which matured 
5-6 days earlier than Osage, in season with Delicious, and 



MUSKMELONS 



73 



4-6 days later than Golden Champlain. It resembled 
Osage in general appearance, but was more globular 
than that variety and had a distinctly lighter green skin 
color and a deeper orange flesh. 

Fruit medium large, 6-6 l > x e'^-C 3 * inches; weight 2-2'> 
pounds. Shape globular, base slightly depressed, apex rounded; 
blossom scar rather obscure; ribs prominent, 1 ' i inches broad at the 
medial; furrows broad, moderately shallow and smooth. Netting 
medium in amount, patchy, rather finely interlaced in some areas, 
often streaked; cork light, distributed unevenly over the ribs; inter 
stices shallow. Skin color pea green. Flesh deep orange, moder- 
ately thin, 1-1 J v inches; texture fine, rather fibrous, firm and rather 
juicy; very sweet, highly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
very good. Cavity medium large, circular in cross-section. Rind 
moderately thick, '4 inch, strong and medium tough. 

Greeley Wonder. Refs. 54, 58, 79, 105, 108, 109, 139. 
Syns. Golden Queen, New Perfect Leader, Perfect 
Leader, Reuter's Wonder, Unsurpassed. 

With the statement " looks like a Hackensack but 
cuts like Osage, " Henry Field Seed Co., Shenandoah, 
Iowa, in 1917 offered seed of this new melon to their 
customers. It originated near Greeley, Colorado, and 
although rather late in maturing, was large and of good 
quality. The Livingston Seed Co. has listed the variety 
for many years. 

This is a midseason variety, about the same season 
as Bender's Surprise, 4 or 5 days later than Delicious 
and a few days earlier than Hale's Best. The fruits are 
more globular than those of Bender's Surprise, have 
somewhat less prominent ribs and furrows, and are 
much more uniformly netted. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and heavy; branches 
moderately many. 

Fruit moderately large, 6J^-7 x 6'4-6 ? 4 inches; weight 4 ] 2-5 
pounds. Shape globular, full at base and apex; blossom scar usually 
obscure; ribs moderately prominent, 1 \ i inches broad at the medial; 
furrows moderately broad, medium deep and usually smooth. 
Netting moderately abundant, interlaced rather coarsely; cork 
moderately heavy, distributed moderately uniformly over the ribs, 
base and apex; interstices golden brown, sparsely mottled with 
green. Flesh pale orange, medium thick, l^-l 1 ^ inches; texture 
fine, slightly fibrous, soft and juicy; sweet, medium flavor, mild 
aroma, quality fair to moderately good. Cavity large, 4 x 3 'a 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, ] 4 inch, moderately 
strong and rather tough. 

Green Fleshed. Refs. 24, 42, 86, 133. Syn. Improved 
Green Fleshed. 
This variety bears out the sentiments of J. C. 
Loudon, the author of An Encyclopedia of Gardening, 
who in 1850 wrote " the sorts which may be fashion- 
able at one period, may be known only historically at 
another." Green Fleshed described by him as a very 
excellent variety exists now in name only. 

Green Fleshed Osa«e. Refs. 11, 29, 53, 97, 98, 99, 
100, 101, 105, 133, 140. 
Chauncey P. Coy of Waterloo, Nebraska, who at 
one time was a grower of large quantities of muskmelon 
seed, found a green-fleshed fruit in a field of Osage. 
This was carefully saved and planted; a selection from 
this was offered, with an excellent illustration, in the 
1893 catalog of Johnson & Stokes. Except for the color 
of the flesh it has proved to be identical with Osage. 



Hackensack. Refs. 7, 15, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 38, 39. 

43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 53, 58, 65, 70, 73, 75, 89, 90. 
91, 93, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 103, 104, 105, 107, 
108, 109, 124, 127, 128, 129. 133, 135, 136, 142, 
143, 144, 146. Syns. Early Leader, Hackensack 
Nutmeg, Improved Hackensack, Large Hacken 
sack. Large Late Hackensack, Late Hackensack, 
New England Hackensack, Turk's Cap. 
The Hackensack melon, for a time the most popular 
green-fleshed melon grown for the New York market, 
was first distributed about 1882 by Peter Henderson & 
Co. It received its name from the New Jersey region 
across the Hudson from New York. It was here origi- 
nated about 1870, probably as a selection from Green 
Citron, a variety it most resembled; but it was 10 years 
later before seed was offered for sale by the trade. 
As grown by the early gardeners it was also known as 
Hackensack Nutmeg, or Turk's Cap. It has remained 
in cultivation these many years and although known 
today as Large Hackensack it continues to be one of the 
largest and finest of the green-fleshed sorts. 

At Geneva, Hackensack can be considered a mid- 
season variety, reaching maturity about the same time 
as Bender's Surprise and 10 days to 2 weeks later than 
Early Green Nutmeg and Jenny Lind. The fruits are 
similar in shape to those of Early Green Nutmeg and 
somewhat like those of Montreal Market in shape and 
character of netting. It differs from the latter in being 
more distinctly oblate, somewhat smaller, and more 
yellowish green in flesh color. It is about a week later 
than Extra Early Hackensack, and is larger, more 
coarsely netted and interlaced, and less uniform in 
degree of ribbing than that variety. 

Plant vigorous: vines moderately heavy and coarse; branches 
many. 

Fruit moderately large, 5 1 j-6 x 7-8 inches; weight 5-6 pounds. 
Shape distinctly oblate, occasionally somewhat lopsided, blossom 
scar conspicuous; ribs prominent, 2 inches broad at the medial; 
furrows moderately broad, deep and smooth. Netting abundant, 
interlaced moderately coarse; cork heavy, distributed uniformly 
over the ribs, base and apex; interstices moderately deep. Skin 
color golden yellow, mottled profusely with green. Flesh light 
green blending into yellowish green near the cavity, moderately 
thick, 1 ' 2 inches; texture coarse, very fibrous, moderately juicy 
and soft; sweet, rather highly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
fair to moderately good. Cavity medium large, 3 x 3'n inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, '4 inch, medium strong and 
moderately tough. 

Hale's Best. Refs. 29, 36, 37, 54, 58, 64, 65, 77, 78, 
79, 81, 95, 105, 109, 110. 121. Syns. Early 
Imperial, Early May, Extra Early Hale's Best, 
First on the Market, Giant Wonder Gem, Gold 
Dollar, Golden Ice Cream, H. B., Imperial 50-15, 
Netted Nugget, New Ideal, 101 Special, Pink 
Queen, Prizetaker. 
The discovery of Hale's Best was due to the alert 
observations of I. D. Hale of California. Mr. Hale at 
one time lived at Rocky Ford but moved to California 
and was a representative of the C. B. Weaver Co. of 
Chicago, one of the largest cantaloupe distributors operat- 
ing in the Imperial Valley. According to Mr. Hale's 



74 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



report, a certain Japanese truck grower near Brawley 
invariably had the first ripe melons from that section. 
He found that this Japanese had started with several 
varieties of melons and that he had been saving his own 
seed from a somewhat mixed assortment of types. Some 
seed of the very earliest was planted in 1923 at Brawley 
and proved to be a week earlier than any of the commer- 
cial sorts grown. Some of these fruits were also shipped 
to the Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed Breeders Associa- 
tion, seed was saved and planted under the supervision 
of James B. Ryan, an officer of the company, and again 
the crop produced the best combination of earliness and 
good shipping type yet observed. No effort was lost 
in multiplying the seed rapidly by growing in both 
Colorado and California, and in 1924 the new melon 
was designated " Hale's Best " or " H. B." 

The original Hale's Best was slightly mixed in some 
characters, and continued selection has resulted in the 
introduction of several well known strains, notably No. 
10, No. 36, No. 112, No. 9-36 and Seed Breeders, 
the most recent improvement introduced in 1936. The 
older type is maintained as the " Old Regular H. B.," 
or as the " Jumbo Strain." Outstanding characteristics 
which place this variety at the very top of all shipping 
melons are its earliness, the attractive well netted fruits, 
the thick firm deep golden-colored flesh, its sweetness, and 
the ability to maintain much of its fine quality even into 
the over-ripe stage. 

Considerable diversity exists between strains of Hale's 
Best in respect to the number cf days required to reach 
edible maturity. The average stock, however, may be 
considered a midseason variety, maturing slightly later 
than Bender's Surprise and several days earlier than 
Edwards Perfecto and Superfecto. The fruits are 
similar to those of Edwards Perfecto, differing from that 
variety in being more oval in shape and having heavier 
and more finely interlaced netting. The flesh is slightly 
thicker and is usually somewhat better quality. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines medium heavy; branches 
moderately many. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6j^ x 5-5' •_> inches; weight 2-232 
pounds. Shape short oval, often nearly globular, blossom scar 
obscure; ribs and furrows absent. Netting very abundant, very 
finely interlaced; cork heavy, distributed uniformly over the entire 
fruit; interstices deep. Skin color dark green; sparsely mottled 
with creamy yellow at full maturity. Flesh orange, moderately 
thick, l\4r\% inches, texture fine, fiberless, firm, rather juicy; 
sweet, slightly sprightly, rather highly flavored and pleasantly 
aromatic; quality very good. Cavity very small, 3 x lJ-£ inches, 
somewhat triangular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, } s inch, 
very strong and tough. 

Hearts of Gold. Refs. 15, 27, 36, 37, 54, 58, 64, 65, 

78, 79, 105, 109, 110, 121, 123. Syns. Golden 

Hearted, Golden Hearts, Improved Hoo Doo, 

New Arizona, Perry's New Hoodoo, Yellow- 

meated Prize. 

The Osage and the Hearts of Gold muskmelon exist 

today as the result of the careful selection work of 

Roland Morrill of Benton Harbor, Michigan. Crosses 

between Osage and Netted Gem about 1890 produced 

the type now known as the Hoodoo group. The Paul 



Rose, selected from one cross by a grower of that name, 
became the leading variety of its day. From another 
cross Mr. Morrill developed the variety which he 
named Hearts of Gold, and for which he was granted en 
Dec. 15, 1914, Trade Mark No. 101487 by the Patent 
Office at Washington, D. C. This melon, while similar 
to the Hoodco, was slightly different and as the name 
became more familiar to growers and market men, 
Hearts of Gold replaced those strains which had been 
known as Improved Hoodoo, etc. In the catalog of 
Jerome B. Rice for 1917 the name occurs thuswise, 
Hoodoo (Hearts of Gold). Maule listed it in 1920, 
Burrell in 1921, and Ferry in 1924. The variety today 
is the most popular melon grown in Michigan. 

This is a midseason variety, reaching maturity at 
Geneva a few days later than Bender's Surprise and 
Hale's Best. The fruits are slightly larger than those 
of Hale's Best and differ from that variety in being 
thicker at the base, less heavily netted, much more 
distinctly ribbed and more prominently furrowed, the 
latter depressions usually being entirely free of netting. 
The flesh is much the same in color but that of Hearts 
of Gold is somewhat thicker at the base and apex. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines moderately coarse and 
heavy; branches moderately many. 

Fruit moderately small, 5'2-6 x 5}:> _ 6 inches; weight 2—2 J 2; 
pounds. Shape cordate to nearly globular, blossom scar moderately 
conspicuous; ribs moderately prominent, l 1 2-i 3 4 inches broad at 
the medial; furrows narrow, moderately shallow and smooth. 
Netting abundant, very finely laced; cork medium heavy, distributed 
uniformly over ribs, base and apex; interstices medium deep. Skin 
color dark green. Flesh orange, moderately thick, 1'2~1 3 4 inches; 
texture fine, very slightly fibrous, firm, moderately juicy; sweet, 
somewhat sprightly, rather highly flavored and aromatic; quality 
very good. Cavity small, 2 r 2 x 2 '4 inches, triangular in cross- 
section. Rind medium thick, ' g inch, dark green, moderately 
strong and tough. 

Hollybrook Luscious. 

This is one of the largest of all melons. It was 
introduced in 1905 by T. W. Wood & Sons, Rich- 
mond, Virginia, and was named from their home seed 
farm, Hollybrook Farm. This melon is rather late and 
probably better suited to conditions farther south 
than New York State. It is strictly a home garden 
variety as the melons are frequently misshapen and not 
attractive in appearance. 

It is a moderately late variety, maturing 4-6 days 
earlier than Montreal Market, in season with Nixon and 
Ohio Sugar, and about a week later than Bender's 
Surprise. It is nearly as oblong as Bay State, decidedly 
darker green in skin color, more deeply furrowed and 
less uniform in netting. The flesh is slightly paler orange 
than that of Bender's Surprise and fully as good quality. 
Its tender skin and irregularity has limited its usage to 
the home garden. 

Plant vigorous; vines very coarse and heavy; branches mod- 
erately few; leaves very large. 

Fruit large, 8-9 x 6*2- 7 inches; weight 6-7 pounds. Shape 
short oval to oblong, often rather irregular; base full; apex even; 
blossom scar moderately conspicuous; ribs very prominent, 2j/£ 
inches broad at the medial, not very uniform; furrows narrow, very 
deep and smooth. Netting sparse, finely interlaced, often in the 




i 



m 




i 







HONEY ROCK (upper) 



GOLDEN CHAMPLAIN 



(Two-thirds natural size) 



MUSKMELONS 



75 



form of hort streaks: cork light, unevenly distributed over the 
ribs; interstices shallow. Skin color dark green changing to burnt 
orange at full maturity. Flesh pale orange, moderately thick, 
1 l _■ 1 : , inches; texture fine, fiberless, soft and juicy; sweet, rather 
highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality good. Cavity 
large, 5x3'.' inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, 
1 ., inch, weak and rather soft. 

Honey. Ref. 30. Syn. New Honey. 

This melon belongs in the Hackensack group and 
was named in 1904 by Wm. Henry Maule as the result 
of a competitive contest. The original seed came 
from Georgia and the variety attracted new friends 
because of the name. 

It is a moderately early variety, maturing about 
3-4 days earlier than Acme, in season with Anne Arundel 
and 6-8 days later than Early Green Nutmeg. The 
fruits are most like those of the latter variety, being 
more globular in shape and having a much less prominent 
blossom scar and more finely interlaced netting. 

Fruit moderately small, 5-5 ' _> x 5-5 '_> inches; weight 2 3 4-3 
pounds. Shape globular, slightly flattened at the ends; blossom 
scar obscure; ribs rather obscure, 1 } j-l :! 4 inches broad at the medial; 
furrows narrow, shallow and smooth. Netting moderately abun- 
dant, often rather finely interlaced; cork moderately heavy, dis- 
tributed uniformly over the ribs: interstices medium deep. Skin 
color dull yellowish brown sparsely mottled with gTeen. Flesh 
light green, moderately thin, 1-1 ' 4 inches; texture fine, slightly 
fibrous, moderately soft and juicy; rather insipid, poorly flavored and 
undesirable aroma; quality poor. Cavity medium large, 3x3 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind moderately thick, }i inch, 
moderately strong and medium tough. 

Honey Ball. Refs. 15, 28, 35, 44, 45, 48, 54, 60, 80, 91, 
95, 105, 108, 109, 133, 139. Syns. Golden Per- 
fection, Texas Honey Ball. 

According to a letter published in the Market 
Growers Journal (186) Honeyball is in reality the old 
variety described by Robinson and by Vilmorin as Golden 
Perfection. 

As Honey Ball, the variety was introduced in 1925 
by several seedsmen including Robert Nicholson Seed 
Co., Dallas, Texas, H. G. Hastings Co., Atlanta, Georgia, 
Grand Junction Seed Co., Grand Junction, Colorado, 
and Aggeler & Musser, Los Angeles, California. In all 
of the early accounts cf the variety, it was said to have 
originated as the result of a cross between Honey Dew 
and Texas Cannonball made by W. H. Parker of Arling- 
ton, Texas. Mr. Parker in 1917 planted these two varie- 
ties and whether a natural cross occurred or a few seed 
of Golden Perfection had been mixed with the Honey 
Dew is not known. To Mr. Parker is given the credit 
for developing the variety. 

This is about the latest melon which can be matured 
in New York State, being 10 days or 2 weeks later than 
Montreal Market and about a week later than Weaver 
Special. It is most like Honey Dew in type, being 
smaller, more uniformly globular, more netted and has 
flesh which is thinner and paler green in color. 

Plant vigorous; vines very coarse and heavy; branches moder- 
ately many; leaves rather yellowish green, usually crumpled and 
have the terminal lobe much more prominent than the other four. 

Fruit moderately small, 5-5'_. x 5-5 '2 inches; weight 2-2 ' ■> 
occasionally 3 pounds. Shape globular, symmetrical, base and apex 



rounded; blossom scar obscure; ribs and furrows absent. Surface 
very pubescent until very nearly mature. Netting very sparse, 
coarsely streaked and interlaced; cork very light, distributed 
unevenly over the surface. Skin color pale yellowish green, pro- 
fusely stippled pale creamy green, turning to yellowish white at 
full maturity. Flesh pale green, medium thick, lj-i-l'j inches; 
texture fine, firm and moderately juicy; sweet, honey-like flavor 
and mildly aromatic; quality good. Cavity small, 2 ' •_> x 2 ' _> inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thin, ' s inch, very firm, strong and 
tough. 

Hone) Dew. Refs. 15, 54, 64, 76, 80, 95, 105, 109, 
110, 129, 139, 143. Syn. White Antibes Winter. 

Honey Dew is an American name for the French 
variety, White Antibes. The well-known French seeds- 
men Vilmorin Andrieux & Co. have listed the variety 
for perhaps fifty years. L. H. Bailey at Cornell Uni- 
versity grew it in trials about 30 years ago but it proved 
unsuited for growth under eastern conditions. 

In 1911 seed from an imported melon served in a 
hotel in New York was saved and sent to John Gauger of 
Swink, Colorado. This seed was planted alongside 
Netted Gem and Casaba and Mr. Gauger thought the 
varieties had hybridized. Dr. D. N. Shoemaker of the 
Bureau of Plant Industry of the United States Depart- 
ment of Agriculture believed that no hybridization had 
taken place and that the new melon was in reality the 
White Antibes grown for years in the south of France and 
in Algeria for foreign shipment. In 1915 Mr. Gauger 
named his melon Honey Dew and since then the 
variety has taken the lead in the winter melon group. 
D. V. Burrell was one of the first seedsmen to catalog 
the variety. 

The New York State season is usually too short for 
this variety. It is most like Honey Ball in type, being 
considerably larger, less netted and often having a 
brighter yellow skin color and deeper green flesh. 

Plant vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches moderately 
many; leaves large, often 6 ] 2 inches long and nearly as broad; 
surface blistered; color moderately bright, rather yellowish green. 

Fruit large, 7-8 x 6 1 £—7 ) 2 inches; weight 5-7 pounds. Shape 
nearly globular, often slightly oval; base and apex rounded; blossom 
scar obscure; ribs and furrows absent. Surface smooth with an 
occasional streak of cork-like net evident. Skin color pale yellowish 
green, later becoming creamy yellow to rather bright yellow at full 
maturity. Flesh light emerald green, thick, l :! 4-2 inches; texture 
fine, crisp, firm and juicy; very sweet, honey-like flavor and mildly 
aromatic; quality very good. Cavity medium large, 3J2 x 3 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind very thin, tj-J's inch, firm and 
tough. 

Honey Rock. Refs. 36, 37, 54, 65, 68, 78, 121. Syns. 

New Sugar Rock, Sugar Rock, Superba, White 

Seeded Delicious. 

Previous to 1920 F. W. Richardson, owner of 

" Wartenbee Farm " near Hicksville, Ohio, had been 

improving his strain of Irondequoit melons. A field 

of this improved stock was planted adjacent to a field 

of Honey Dew and selections were made from this 

field of Irondequoit and planted the next year on the 

same farm. In this planting there were many hills 

that produced melons that looked like Honey Dews but 

that had the flesh characteristics of Irondequoit. The 

best fruits of this apparent cross were selected and seed 



76 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



planted in the middle of a large field of Golden Cham- 
plain. A mass selection for seed was made from the 
Golden Champlain field and part of the seed sent to his 
son, G. A. Richardson of Ocala, Florida. In a field of 
this Florida planting Mr. Richardson found three hills 
of a thick rinded, ropy-netted melon. Seed from these 
three hills was saved, planted, and produced melons of 
every conceivable type. The best selection possible 
was made and seed sent to one of the Richardson farms 
near Howe in the St. Joe River Valley, Indiana. Further 
selections were made and finally in 1925 a selection was 
named Honey Rock and found its way into the trade. 
In the succeeding ten years it has become very popular 
in Indiana, Michigan and other sections. 

It is a midseason variety maturing at Geneva 2 or 3 
days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with 
Milwaukee Market and 3-4 days later than Delicious. 
It has the shape of Daisy and Perfecto, a netting most 
like that of Abbott's Pearl and the skin color of Golden 
Combination and Oregon Delicious. The flesh is like 
that of the Bender in color but is somewhat more firm 
than in that variety. 

Plant moderately vigorous: vines moderately coarse; branches 
many. 

Fruit moderately small, 5j^-6 x 5}£-6 inches: weight 2 1 2—3 
pounds. Shape globular; base full: apex even, often terminating in 
a small protuberance from which radiate streaks of netting in more 
or less spoke-like fashion: ribs obscure to nearly absent; furrows 
obscure. Netting abundant, coarsely interlaced, occasionally 
streaked, somewhat circular in pattern at the base; cork very heavy, 
distributed moderately uniform over the entire fruit; interstices 
large and deep. Skin color pale grayish green, changing to pale 
cream at full maturity. Flesh orange, medium thick, 1 1 _ l -l ] 2 inches; 
texture slightly coarse and fibrous, firm, moderately juicy; sweet, 
rather highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality good. 
Cavity moderately small, 3x2'; inches, circular in cross-section. 
Rind thick, ] 4 inch, very definite, dark green, strong and moderately 
tough. 

Hoodoo. Refs. 15, 36, 58, 105, 110, 119, 136, 141. 
Syns. Oblong Hoo Doo, Ordway Queen. 
Paul Rose of South Frankfort, Michigan, who in 
1898 introduced the Paul Rose variety, continued his 
selection work and in 1907 sold to D. M. Ferry seed 
of a new variety which Ferry introduced in 1908 as 
Hoodoo. This variety soon took the place of the Paul 
Rose and increased the popularity of this type of melon 
over those cf the larger fruited Osage group. 

Hummer, 

This melon, similar in type to Hale's Best, was intro- 
duced in 1928 by Kilgore Seed Co., Plant City, Florida. 
It is a midseason variety maturing 4-5 days earlier than 
Hale's Best, in season with Burrell's Gem, and 6-8 days 
later than Delicious. The fruits are most like those of 
Hale's Best but are larger and more oblong in shape. 
They are as large as Burrell's Gem but lack the smooth 
furrows of that variety and are not inclined to be as 
fusiform in shape. 

Fruit medium large, 7-8 x 5-5 ' £ inches: weight 2} ^-3 pounds. 
Shape oval, rounded at base and apex; blossom scar obscure: ribs 
obscure: furrows occasionally present, very narrow, very shallow 



and completely netted. Netting very abundant, finely interlaced: 
cork moderately heavy, distributed evenly over the surface; inter- 
stices medium deep. Skin color green. Flesh orange, medium 
thick, T .-l^ inches; texture slightly coarse, slightly fibrous, 
moderately firm and moderately juicy; sweet, somewhat sprightly, 
highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality good. Cavity 
moderately small, 3\ t x 1 ; 4 inches: triangular in cross-section. 
Rind moderately thin, ! s inch, strong and tough. 

Ideal. Refs. 101, 133. Syn. Buckbee's Ideal. 

This was a variety cataloged by The Vaughan 
Seed Store of Chicago in 1900 and by H. W. Buckbee of 
Rockford, Illinois, in 1902. It was a rather large melon, 
in shape somewhat like Hackensack but with rich salmon 
flesh. 

Another variety bearing this name was listed in 
1913 by Geo. Tait 85 Sons of Norfolk, Virginia. The 
original catalog descriptions of this and the Ideal of 
Vaughan are quite similar and it is possible that they 
originated from the same source. Tait continues to 
list Ideal as a popular sort. The description below is 
of melons grown from seed supplied by Buckbee. 

Fruit moderately small, 7-7}-£ x 4 3 4-5 inches; weight . 
pounds. Shape oval, occasionally somewhat fusiform, base rounded 
and full, often somewhat tapered, apex even to slightly raised: 
blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly prominent, l'o inches broad at 
the medial; furrows medium broad, moderately shallow and very 
sparsely and lightly netted, occasionally smooth. Netting moder- 
I ately abundant, rather coarsely interlaced, often streaked; cork 
' medium heavy, often flattened, distributed rather uniformly over 
the ribs, base and apex, occasionally somewhat patchy; interstices 
medium deep. Skin color dull green, later becoming profusely 
blotched with dark burnt orange. Flesh orange, medium thick, 
1 ] 4 inches; texture coarse and fibrous, rather firm and moderately 
juicy; very sweet, somewhat sprightly, rather highly flavored and 
mildly aromatic; quality good. Cavity medium large, 4 x _ 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind moderately thick. ] 4 inch, 
medium strong and moderately tough. 

Imperial Sunset. 

This is a new melon of the Honey Ball type which, 
because of the salmon pink flesh, gives promise of becom- 
ing a successful variety for the market. Prof. J. B. 
Norton representing the United States Department of 
Agriculture made the original selection in 1928 in the 
Imperial Valley, California. Garwood 8b Woodside, 
Rocky Ford, Colorado, offered seed in 1934. Unlike 
many melons of its type, it should be picked on the slip. 
The vines make a vigorous growth and remain green 
over a long season, ripening fruits soon after Weaver's 
Special. 

Ironclad. Refs. 29, 53, 98, 99, 100, 133, 140. 

The Ironclad melon was introduced in 1896 by 
Vaughan's Seed Store of Chicago. The originators, 
C. P. Coy 8s Sons of Waterloo, Nebraska, considered 
it worthy of introduction because of its promise as a long 
distance shipping melon. The illustration in the Vaughan 
catalog shows it to be an oval -shaped melon with heavy 
coarse netting. Mr. Coy believed that he had secured a 
type with thick, leathery, shell-like skin. It was a 
second early sort with flesh thick, deep yellow and very 
sweet. The variety was not listed after 1903. 



MUSKMELONS 



77 



Irondequoit. Refs. 6, 15, 29, 37. 53. 54, 58, 64. 75, 95, 
96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110, 
112. 115. 121, 123. 128. 129, 133. 140, 141,144. 
Syns. Famous Indiana, Improved Tip Top, 
Indiana, Indianapolis Market. Netted Tip Top, 
New Tip Top, New Tip Top Nutmeg, " Tip 
Top." 
The Irondequoit melon was for many years the 
leading variety grown in Western New York and was 
first offered in the 1889 catalog of James Vick, seedsman, 
Rochester, New York. The melon had its origin in the 
field of a prominent gardener at Irondequoit, who brought 
his melons to the Rochester market. They were observed 
by Mr. Vick who secured seed and after testing for a 
few years deemed it worthy of introduction. Some con- 
sider it an enlarged Miller's Cream, but it seems more 
nearly like the melons in the Surprise group. 

This is a midseason variety maturing 4-6 days 
earlier than Hale*s Best, in season with Bender's Surprise, 
and about a week later than Delicious. It most 
resembles Bender's Surprise but differs from that variety 
in being more globular in shape, in having lighter and 
more finely interlaced netting, paler yellow skin color, 
much smaller blossom scar, a greater susceptibility to 
cracking and consequently poorer keeping qualities. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and heavy, branches 
many. 

Fruit moderately large. 6' £-7 x 6 1 j inches, often larger, weight 
5-6 pounds, often more. Shape globular; base full, slightly flattened; 
apex even, somewhat susceptible to cracking, blossom scar small, 
not very conspicuous; ribs moderately prominent, 1 '■■-2 inches 
broad at the medial: furrows medium deep, medium broad and 
smooth. Netting moderately abundant, rather finely interlaced; 
cork medium light, distributed rather uniformly over the ribs; 
interstices shallow. Skin color pale yellowish cream. Flesh orange, 
moderately thick, 1 J —l S i inches; texture rather coarse and slightly 
fibrous, soft and juicy: sweet and fair flavor, pleasantly aromatic; 
quality very good. Cavity moderately large, 3 x 3 ' 2 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, ! j inch, rather weak and 
moderately tender. 

Jenny Lind. Refs. 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 15, 22, 23, 25, 26, 29, 
39, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 53, 58, 63, 75, 83, 89, 90, 91, 
95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
109, 110, 125, 127, 128, 129, 133, 136, 140, 144, 146. 
Syns. Dreamwold, Dwarf, Earliest Ripe, Early 
Honeysweet, Early Jenny, Early Jenny Lind, 
Eighty-eight, Extra Early Jenny Lind, Extra 
Early Prize Jenny Lind, Extra Early Wonder, 
Flat Jenny Lind, Improved Early Jenny Lind, 
Improved Jenny, Improved Jenny Lind, Improved 
Shipper's Delight, Jenny, Jenny Lind Citron, 
Jersey Belle, Jersey Button, Large Jenny Lind, 
Norfolk Button, Prize Jenny Lind, Roberts, 
Round Jenny Lind, Shipper's Delight, Shipper's 
Pride. Small Jenny Lind, True Jenny Lind. 
According to Dr. Robert P. Harris of Philadelphia, 
" The Center melon known on the markets of Phila- 
delphia previous to 1840 was supposedly the progenitor 
of the Jenny Lind named about 1846." The original 
stock of the variety is thought to have come from Armenia 
where green-fleshed sorts of this type are common. For 
fifty years Jenny Lind was one of the leading early green- 



fleshed melons suitable for the home garden and for the 
nearby market. There was the same progressive change 
in type of the Jenny Lind as we find later in the com- 
mercially important shipping melons grown in the west. 
There were many named selections from this variety, 
one of the most important being Shipper's Delight 
introduced in 1897 by Johnson 8s Stokes. One char- 
acteristic of the fruit was the striking appearance of the 
blossom end which in some selections appeared as a small 
knob. Norfolk Button and Jersey Button were sub- 
varieties exemplitying this character. 

This is an early variety maturing 4-6 days earlier 
than Delicious, in season with Early Prolific Nutmeg 
and about a week later than Early Green Citron. The 
variety is similar in shape to Fordhook, and is much more 
oblate than Early Green Citron and Early Prolific 
Nutmeg. The netting and degree of ribbing is much 
like that of Early Green Citron while the flesh is brighter 
green and contains much less yellow. 

Plant moderately weak; vines slender; branches medium in 
number. 

Fruit small, 4-4 ' j x 5-6 inches; weight 1 1 4 — 1 3 j pounds. 
Shape oblate, base and apex flattened and full; blossom scar con- 
spicuous, often with rather prominent navel; ribs slightly prominent, 
1-1 j 4 inches broad at the medial, furrows moderately narrow, rather 
shallow and smooth. Netting moderately sparse, rather coarsely 
interlaced; cork medium light, unevenly distributed over the ribs; 
interstices medium deep. Skin color dull brownish orange, profusely 
mottled with green. Flesh light green, moderately thin, 3 4 -l inch: 
texture slightly coarse and fibrous, soft and juicy; sweet, mildly 
flavored and lacking in aroma; quality fair to moderately good. 
Cavity small, 2' 4 x 2 ] > inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
thin, } i inch, weak and tender. 

Kinsman Queen. Refs. 29, 53, 97, 99, 100, 133, 136, 
140. 

The Joseph Harris Company, Moreton Farm, 
Cold water, New York, introduced this variety in 1898 as 
a new melon of considerable merit coming from a cross 
between Emerald Gem and another variety of large 
size. According to the catalog of L. Templin 8s Sons, 
Calla, Ohio, it was originated by F. Banning of Kinsman, 
Ohio. By some it was called a yellow fleshed White 
Japan. An excellent illustration in the 1898 Harris 
catalog shows the fruits rather deeply ribbed and flattened 
at both ends. 

This was a moderately late variety maturing about 
a week after Surprise and 4-6 days earlier than Giant. 
It resembled Giant more than any other sort, although 
many fruits were as irregularly ribbed as Surprise. It 
was considerably smaller than Giant and had a darker 
gray-green skin color. The flesh was more yellow than 
that of Surprise but much the same in texture. 

Fruit medium large, 5'_>-6 x 6'j-7 inches; weight 3-3 ' 2 
pounds. Shape somewhat oblate, flattened at the ends, blossom 
scar large and conspicuous; ribs prominent, irregular in size; furrows 
broad, usually rather deep, smooth. Netting practically absent, 
occasionally slightly streaked in patches: cork very light and very 
unevenly distributed. Skin color grayish green, becoming deep 
yellowish cream at full maturity. Flesh deep yellow, medium 
thick. 1 ' 4 1 ' 2 inches: texture medium fine, very slightly fibrous, 
soft and juicy; sweet, fair flavor and mildly aromatic; quality good. 
Cavity medium large, 2 ' j-3 x 3-3 ' 2 inches, circular in cross-section. 
Rind medium thick, ' , inch, rather soft and tender. 



78 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Knight. Refs. 15, 27, 58, 64, 68, 79, 105, 109, 136. 

Syns. Early Knight, Early Sweet Air, Extra Early 

Knight, Maryland, New Arundel, New Extra 

Early Knight, New Knight Cantaloupe, New 

Maryland, Rival, Sugar Sweet, Sweet Air, Victor. 

The Knight melon has, since its introduction in 

1908 by Geo. Tait 8& Sons, Norfolk, Virginia, held its 

place in that section as the earliest commercial green 

fleshed variety. Abe Knight of Pasadena, Anne 

Arundel County, Maryland, originated the variety, 

possibly as a large fruited selection from Netted Gem 

with which it is compared in early catalogs. Walter P. 

Stokes listed it in 1909 as Sugar Sweet but the name 

Knight has continued as the more popular. A striking 

characteristic of the fruits is their rather uniform tendency 

to taper somewhat at the stem end. In quality the 

fruits have a sweetness and aroma which is quite distinct. 

It is a moderately early variety, maturing 4 6 days 

earlier than Acme, in season with Bcttomly and Netted 

Gem, and 4-6 days later than Jenny Lind. It is very 

similar to Bottomly in shape and differs from that 

variety in being slightly smaller, not as heavily netted, 

and in having a green flesh tinted with orange at the 

cavity. It is more tapered at the base than Netted 

Gem and is more coarsely netted. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines medium slender; branches few. 

Fruit moderately small, 5' L >-6 x 4-4' o inches: weight 1 ' ->-2 
pounds. Shape oval, base extended or tapering and apex gently 
rounded; blossom scar obscure; ribs moderately prominent, 1 ' £-1% 
inches broad at the medial; furrows medium broad, moderately 
shallow and smooth. Netting moderately abundant, medium finely 
laced; cork moderately heavy, distributed uniformly over the ribs 
and base; interstices moderately deep. Skin color dark green, 
sparsely mottled with golden yellow at full maturity. Flesh light 
green blending into a salmon pink adjacent to the cavity, moderately 
thin, 1-1 'i inches; texture slightly coarse and fibrous, medium soft 
and moderately juicy; very sweet, somewhat sprightly, rather 
highly flavored, pleasantly aromatic; quality good. Cavity moder- 
ately small, 3^ x 2 inches, triangular in cross-section. Rind 
moderately thin, ' > inch, medium strong and rather tough. 

Lake Champlain. Refs. 54, 105. Syn. Chipman's 
Lake Champlain. 

H. J. Walrath of Conneaut, Ohio, who has become 
well known as a melon grower and seedsman, was the 
originator of this variety. Situated in a section where 
earliness was of the greatest importance, Mr. Walrath 
experimented with several varieties and finally chose 
for his main plantings the Paul Rose and Early Ripe, 
a strain of Early Green Nutmeg. This gave him a 
variety with orange flesh and one with green flesh. One 
season he noticed a plant in the Early Ripe rows that 
produced golden yellow -fleshed fruits. These were saved 
and seed planted the next year. After several years 
selection a fixed type was secured. Some of the seed 
was sent to a relative at Crown Point on Lake Cham- 
plain, New York. The result there corroborated the 
earliness of the new variety which made it outstanding in 
Ohio. In 1919 S. M. Isbell & Co., Jackson, Michigan, 
introduced Lake Champlain, " a new muskmelon that 
commands the market." 

This variety with Gclden Champlain is considered 
the earliest commercial sort in many sections. Chip- 



man's Lake Champlain named for the late George F. 
Chipman, editor of Country Guide, Winnipeg, Canada, 
has proved of value in the Northern Plains area. This 
strain is offered by Oscar H. Will & Co., Bismarck, 
North Dakota. 

Lewis Perfection. Ref. 106. Syn. Lewis Good 
Traveler. 
Lewis Perfection originated with Mr. Lewis of 
Pontiac, Michigan, and was introduced in 1906 by J. J. H. 
Gregory & Son, Marblehead, Massachusetts. According 
to the illustration in Gregory's catalog, this melon was 
quite similar to Hollybrook Luscious. It produced large 
sized fruits often irregular in shape with thick orange 
yellow flesh. It was late in season and in some sections 
failed to ripen fruit. 

Livingston's Market. Refs. 9, 22, 29, 92, 96, 97, 98, 

99, 100, 125, 133, 136. Syns. Livingston's Market 

Nutmeg, Market, Market Nutmeg. 
This melon was listed and illustrated in 1892 by 
A. W. Livingston Sons, Columbus, Ohio, and a year 
later by the Ford Seed Co. of Ravenna, Ohio. It was a 
large green fleshed melon with close netting and rather 
shallow ribs. It was possibly a selection from Hacken- 
sack, which it closely resembled. 

Lone Star. Refs. 53, 98, 99, 100, 133. 

This was first advertised in 1896 by Johnson and 
Stokes, Philadelphia, as a new melon from Texas. Lone 
Star melons were described as free from ribs, finely 
netted, and having unusually thick, salmon colored 
flesh. It was listed for about ten years by this company. 

Long Island Beauty. Refs. 4, 7, 10, 29, 40, 53, 58, 

64, 73, 89, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 109, 
112, 127, 128, 133, 136, 140. Syn. Island Beauty. 

This melon, introduced in 1892 by J. M. Thorburn 
8s Co. of New York, was a selection from Hackensack 
and originated on Long Island. Like most selections and 
new sorts it was put forth as superior to its precursor 
in earliness and in having somewhat heavier netting. 

This is a midseason variety maturing 10 days to two 
weeks earlier than Montreal Market, in season with 
Hackensack and 3 4 days later than Acme. It is similar 
in shape to Montreal Market and differs from that 
variety in being considerably smaller, slightly less netted 
and lighter green in skin color. It is more globular 
than Hackensack and has a more yellowish green flesh. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and heavy; branches 
medium in number. 

Fruit medium large, 5'o-6 x 7-7 'j inches: weight 4— 1'j 
pounds. Shape deep oblate, slightly depressed at the base, even at 
the apex; blossom scar conspicuous; ribs prominent, 2-2 'j inches, 
broad at the medial; furrows broad, deep and smooth. Netting 
abundant, coarsely interlaced; cork heavy, distributed uniformly 
over base, apex and ribs: interstices moderately deep. Skin color 
light green, moderately mottled with dull yellow. Flesh light 
green blending to a pale yellowish white near the cavity; medium 
thick, 1' 1 1 ' j inches; texture moderately coarse and fibrous, soft 
and juicy; moderately sweet, mildly flavored, and mildly aromatic; 
quality fair. Cavity moderately large, 3 l , x 3 ' •_. inches, circular 
in cross-section. Rind thick, ' 4 inch, yellowish green, moderately 
strong and medium tough. 




"T 



'¥ .if. 



'j 



I 



... ^gfSS^r 






w 
o 

KM 



MUSKMELONS 



79 



Long John. 

This new melon from Anne Arundel County, 
Maryland, is similar in type to Acme. The Meyer Seed 
Co. of Baltimore introduced this variety in 1930. 

It is a midseason sort maturing 3-4 days earlier 
than Hackensack, in season with Acme, and 4-6 days 
later than Anne Arundel. It most resembles Anne 
Arundel but is more slender and oval shaped, not as 
fusiform as that variety. The skin color is also decidedly 
darker green, much like that of Bun-ell's Gem at com- 
parable stages of development. The flesh is similar to 
that of Anne Arundel but has a pink lining to the cavity 
not present in that variety. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-7 x 4— I'j inches; weight 2-2 ' j 
pounds. Shape long oval, base and apex slightly tapering, rounded 
and full at the extreme ends: blossom scar raised and corky, con- 
spicuous; ribs slightly prominent, 1 ' ■> inches broad at the medial; 
furrows narrow, shallow and netted. Netting abundant, often 
short streaked, nearly parallel to one another and somewhat dove- 
tailed at the ends, occasionally finely interlaced; cork moderately 
heavy, evenly distributed over the surface; interstices moderately 
deep. Skin color dark green, later turning to brownish green. Flesh 
light green, sparsely tinted with pale pink about the cavity, moder- 
ately thin, 1-1 \ 4 inches; texture moderately coarse, fibrous, moder- 
ately firm and medium juicy; moderately sweet, mildly flavored 
and faintly aromatic; quality fair to poor. Cavity medium large, 
4 ' 2 x 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, \ 4 inch, strong 
and tough. 

Long Yellow. Refs. 4, 11, 20, 25, 26, 29, 44, 45, 46, 49, 
51, 53, 70, 86, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 102, 127, 133, 138. 
Syns. A. S. & L. Melon, Arlington Long Yellow, 
Big Ben, California Cream, Common Muskmelon, 
Granite State, Improved Yellow Large Musk- 
melon, Large Round Yellow, Long Orange. 
In 1863 Burr described under the name Large- 
ribbed Netted or Common Muskmelon a variety which 
undoubtedly later came to be better known as Long 
Yellow. The names as indicated represented the 
largest yellow-fleshed melon grown and the type has 
persisted to the present day. The long oval-shaped 
melons have never been as popular as the short oval or 
round types and this has been attributed to the fact 
that the long oval types are more subject to injury in 
handling. The variety was undoubtedly used in crossing 
to bring out newer varieties with orange flesh. 

This is a moderately early variety maturing at 
Geneva about ten days earlier than Bay View, in season 
with Delicious and Extra Early Osage and about 4-6 days 
later than Golden Champlain. It is very much like 
Bay View in shape and skin color. It differs from that 
variety in flesh color, more granular in flesh character, 
and in being larger, less netted and less finely interlaced. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and heavy; branches 
many. 

Fruits very large, 10-12 x 5-6 inches; weight 6-8 pounds. 
Shape fusiform to long oval, base tapering, apex even, blossom scar 
obscure: ribs prominent, 2 inches broad at the medial; furrows 
broad, moderately deep and smooth. Netting moderately sparse, 
medium finely laced; cork medium long, unevenly distributed over 
the ribs; interstices shallow. Skin color dull orange yellow sparsely 
mottled with green. Flesh pale orange yellow, medium thick, 
l 1 |-l'j inches; texture fine; fiberless, moderately firm, rather 
dry, insipid, poorly flavored and lacking in aroma; quality poor. 



Cavity very large, 8x3 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
thick, ' 1 inch, weak and tender. 

Los Lngeles Market. 

This melon was introduced about 1908 by Aggeler & 
Musser of Los Angeles. With the exception of Giant 
it was the largest fruited sort then known. 

It was a moderately late variety, maturing between 
Hackensack and Montreal Market. It was somewhat 
more globular than Hackensack, equally as well netted, 
and intermediate in size between that variety and 
Montreal Market. Also the skin color was more orange 
and the ribs less prominent. 

Fruit moderately large, 7-8 x 6-7 inches, weight 5-6 pounds. 
Shape nearly globular to slightly oval, symmetrical, base and apex 
full and broadly rounded; blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly promi- 
nent, 1?4~2 inches broad at the medial; furrows broad, shallow and 
netted. Netting abundant, rather coarsely interlaced; cork heavy 
and broad, distributed evenly over the surface; interstices moderately 
deep. Skin color dull burnt orange. Flesh green, moderately 
thick, 1 ] 2-1 '4 inches; texture coarse and fibrous, medium soft and 
juicy; very sweet, highly flavored and distinctly aromatic; quality 
very good. Cavity large, 4x3 inches, circular in cross-section. 
Rind thick, J4 inch, strong and tough. 

Matchless. Refs. 69, 95, 101, 133, 136, 140. Syn. 
Early Matchless. 

From W. B. Covalt of Kansas, W. Atlee Burpee 
received a basket of muskmelons, which, although pos- 
sessing seme of the characteristics of the leading melons 
of that period, were apparently different enough to 
attract notice. After a year's trial and testing by 
several noted melon growers, Burpee introduced it in 
1901 as Matchless. Matchless remained a popular 
variety for nearly thirty years. 

It is a midseason variety, maturing about 3^1 days 
earlier than Hackensack, in season with Acme and 3-4 
days later than Netted Gem. It is larger than Netted 
Gem but otherwise is similar to it in shape, character of 
netting, and flesh color. 

Fruit moderately small, 6 ] 2-7 x 4 ] 2-5 inches; weight 2 ! 2~3 
pounds. Shape moderately long, plump, oval, base and apex 
gently rounded; blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly prominent, 1 1 -> 
inches broad at the medial; furrows narrow, very shallow and 
usually smooth. Netting abundant, medium finely interlaced; 
cork medium heavy, distributed uniformly over the ribs, base and 
apex; interstices medium deep. Skin color dark bronze green. 
Flesh light green, moderately thin, 1-1 ] 4 inches; texture medium 
coarse and rather fibrous, soft and juicy; very sweet, somewhat 
sprightly, rather highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality 
good. Cavity moderately small, 3 1 2—+ x 1 %-2 inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind thick, ' 4 inch, medium strong and moderately 
tough. 

McCotter's Pride. Refs. 98, 99, 100, 101, 133, 136. 
This name was given to a variety introduced in 1897 
by D. M. Ferry 85 Co., Detroit, Michigan, and listed by 
them until 1912. Although rather late in season, it was 
a variety intended to fill the need for a large melon, 
spherical in shape, with orange flesh, and of high quality. 
It was very similar to Buckbee's Ideal. 

McDaniels Nugget. Ref. 81. Syns. Arizona Nugget, 
Yuma Nugget. 
E. M. McDaniel of Yuma, Arizona, selected this 
melon from a strain of Perfecto cantaloupes. It was 



80 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



first known commercially in 1933 as McDaniel's Nugget 
and as such was sent out for trial by the Ferry-Morse 
Seed Co. Since that time it has become better known as 
Arizona Nugget and as such is cataloged by the Woodside 
Seed Growers Co. of Rocky Ford, Colorado. The fruits 
are smaller than those of Perfecto, are heavily netted, 
slightly ribbed, and have flesh which is a deep salmon 
in color. 

Melodew. Syns. Golden Melodew, Honeymel, Honey 
Net, Masterpiece. 

This new melon was discovered by J. E. Gauger 
of Swink, Colorado, who had named and introduced 
the Honey Dew many years ago. Melodew was first 
introduced in 1913 by the Melodew Company, Rocky 
Ford. Walter Higbee and Jerre Cover took a leading 
part in the selection work. It has been successfully 
grown in Northern districts where the season is too short 
for Honey Dew. 

It is a moderately late melon at Geneva, having 
reached maturity 4 or 5 days earlier than Weaver Special 
in season with Abbott's Pearl and Golden Combination 
and about a week or 10 days later than Sugar Rock. 
In exterior appearance the fruits most resemble Weaver 
Special and Honeyball, although they are usually some- 
what more oval than these varieties and less uniformly 
netted than those of the former. It is similar in shape to 
Hale's Best, but is decidedly less netted and distinctly 
more creamy yellow in skin color. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines coarse and moderately heavy; 
branches moderately few. 

Fruit moderately small, 5-5 1 ;; x 4'o-5 inches; weight 2-2*2 
pounds. Shape short oval, base and apex rounded and full, blossom 
scar inconspicuous; ribs obscure, medium broad, 1 ! 4 inches at the 
medial; furrows very shallow, narrow and sparsely netted. Netting 
moderately abundant, rather coarsely interlaced, often somewhat 
streaked; cork medium light, distributed uniformly over the entire 
fruit; interstices moderately shallow; skin color pale creamy yellow 
with a greenish tint. Flesh light green, medium thick, 1 : 4 -l ] 2 
inches, texture coarse, slightly fibrous, very firm, moderately juicy; 
sweet, somewhat sprightly, rather highly flavored and mildly 
aromatic; quality good. Cavity small, 2 ; \j x 1 * _> inches, triangular 
in cross-section. Rind medium thick, } s~ i 4 inch, light green, strong 
and tough. 

Melrose. Refs. 7, 11, 29, 53, 69, 96, 97, 98. 99, 101, 107, 
112, 114, 128, 133, 136, 140. Syn. New Melrose. 

This variety came from a Mr. Paynter Frame of 
Delaware as a chance seedling in a mixed planting grown 
in 1885. Mr. Frame while going over the field late in 
the season noticed a few melons that were edible after 
the others were gone. Seed from these fruits gave 
some rather promising plants and after several years 
selection, a type which was fixed and pure was secured. 
Seeds were offered in packets by W. Atlee Burpee in 
1893, and for many years the variety was quite popular. 

This was a moderately late variety maturing a few 
days earlier than Texas Cannon Ball and in season with 
Nixon. It was slightly more oval than Texas Cannon 
Ball, but very similar to that variety in character of 
netting and skin color. The flesh was usually more 
often tinted with pink about the cavity. 



Fruit moderately small, 5 1 j-6 x 5-5 J 2 inches; weight 2 1 . 1 -2 1 _; 
pounds. Shape short oval to nearly globular, base rounded to very 
slightly extended, apex rounded; blossom scar obscure; ribs and 
furrows obscure. Netting moderately abundant, very largely 
streaked, slightly cross netted, somewhat circular at base and 
apex; net medium light, distributed moderately uniform over the 
surface; interstices medium shallow. Skin color dull bronze green 
mottled with dull orange brown at full maturity. Flesh green with 
a narrow pink area about the cavity, thin, Jg-l inch; texture coarse 
and fibrous, medium firm and medium juicy; sweet, fair flavor and 
mildly aromatic; quality fair to good. Cavity moderately small, 
3 x 2 ' 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, 
1 * inch, moderately strong and tough. 

Miller's Cream. Refs. 46, 84, 118. Syns. Miller's 
Cream Nutmeg, Miller's Cream Osage, Miller's 
Hybrid, New Princess. 
When the number of good varieties was much smaller 
than it is today it was the policy of many leading 
gardeners to test out all the promising novelties as 
offered. John D. Miller of Elmira, New York, in pur- 
suance of this policy grew among other varieties Casaba, 
Sill's Hybrid and Green Nutmeg muskmelons. In 1877 
a different appearing melon was noticed in the field 
planted with seed of his own saving. The progeny of 
this apparent hybrid differed widely in shape, size, 
skin color and form but after a period of selection a 
rather long type with green skin and deep orange flesh 
of the highest quality was developed. Seed of this was 
first distributed in 1885 by J. J. H. Gregory of Marble- 
head, Massachusetts, under the name Miller's Cream. 
In describing this melon in 1886 Goff wrote: " This 
delicious melon is distinct from any I have thus far 
described. I think it is the first oval, orange fleshed 
melon I have met." The new melon soon became very 
popular and was a leading variety in nearly all musk- 
melon growing districts. From seed as originally sent 
out there occasionally appeared mixed types. Con- 
tinued selection on these resulted in a fairly stable sort 
but today there is no recognized type for Miller's Cream. 
Osage and Miller's Cream from the time of their separate 
introduction have been confused and it is little wonder 
that today they are considered as identical. 

Millionaire. 

This is a melon probably grown only in California. 
It was introduced there about 1918 by Chas. C. Navlet 
Co., San Jose, California. 

This was a moderately early variety, maturing 
6-8 days earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with 
Delicious, and 4-6 days later than Golden Champlain. 
It was similar in shape, character of netting and skin 
color to that of Golden Combination. It differed from 
that variety in being smaller and in having a distinctly 
pale, more cream-colored flesh. 

Fruit moderately large, 6 ] 2~7 x 7-7 '-j inches; weight 5-6 
pounds. Shape globular, slightly flattened at the base, apex even, 
slightly susceptible to cracking; blossom scar rather conspicuous; 
ribs slightly prominent, 2 inches broad at the medial; furrows broad, 
shallow and smooth. Netting moderately abundant, rather coarsely 
interlaced, often streaked and circular in pattern at the base; cork 
medium heavy, distributed moderately uniform over the ribs, base 
and apex; interstices medium deep. Skin color pale grayish green 
later turning to creamy yellow. Flesh pale yellowish cream, thick, 



MUSKMELONS 



81 



l'_— 2 inches; texture coarse and fibrous, medium soft and juicy; 
sweet, medium flavor, mildly aromatic; quality good. Cavity 
medium large, 3x3 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, 
?4 inch, medium strong and slightly tough. 

Milwaukee Market. Refs. 15, 37, 54, 65, 68, 75, 105, 
109. 121, 123, 133, 136, 143. Syns. Big Profit, 
Honey Sweet, Improved Milwaukee Market, 
Pfister, Thomas Hybrid, Utter. 
This melon is considered by many growers in the 
north central states area to be the best melon in its class. 
It was offered sometime previous to 1906 by Currie 
Brothers of Milwaukee and by Vaughan's Seed Co. in 
1907. Its origination is credited to a cross between 
Surprise and a Gem melon made by a grower near 
Burlington, Wisconsin. At the time of its introduction 
there were several strains or selections in the hands of 
growers, of which the Utter and Pfister strains were 
acknowledged as superior. The name Milwaukee was 
popular, however, and as such it is well known today. 
It is a midseason variety, maturing 2 or 3 days 
earlier than Bender's Surprise, in season with Honey 
Rock, and 4-6 days later than Delicious. It is very 
similar to Bender's Surprise but will average smaller, 
and is more symmetrical, less deeply furrowed, somewhat 
more profusely netted and finely interlaced, has a smaller 
blossom scar and is more susceptible to splitting at that 
end. It is believed to be the best in quality of the group, 
but its relatively poor keeping quality has limited its 
use in this section. 

Plant vigorous; vines medium heavy; branches many. 

Fruit moderately large, 7 1 ^-8 x 7-7 '2 inches; weight 5 ' j-6 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, slightly flattened at the base, 
rounded at the apex: blossom scar small, moderately corky: ribs 
moderately prominent, 1 J >-2 inches broad at the medial: furrows 
medium broad, rather shallow and netted. Netting abundant, 
usually finely interlaced, often rather coarse; cork medium heavy, 
rather broad, distributed unevenly over the fruit; interstices shallow. 
Skin color pale creamy yellow. Flesh orange, moderately thick, 
l 1 ^! 3 ^ inches: texture moderately coarse and fibrous, soft and 
juicy: sweet, rather highly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
good. Cavity large, 4x3 inches. Rind medium thick, } s inch, 
rather weak and moderately tender. 

Missouri. Refs. 26, 53, 98, 99, 100, 101, 133, 140. 
Syn. Missouri Nutmeg. 
This was a melon offered in 1892 by D. Landreth 
& Sons. Philadelphia. A cut shows the fruits quite 
like those of Hackensack, with heavy netting and deep 
ribbing. It was a green fleshed sort. 

Montreal Market. Refs. 4, 7, 14, 15, 23, 25, 28, 

29, 35, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46, 49, 50, 51, 53, 64, 69, 
70, 71, 73, 83, 84, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 96, 97, 98, 
99, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 125, 
126, 127, 129, 133, 135, 136, 140, 142, 143, 144, 
146. Syns. Canadian, Canadian Market, Giant 
Montreal, Giant Montreal Market, Green Mont- 
real, Improved Montreal Green Nutmeg, 
Improved Montreal Market, Large Montreal 
Market, Large Sweet Nutmeg, Mammoth Mont- 
real, Mammoth Montreal Nutmeg, Montreal, 
Montreal Beauty, Montreal Green, Montreal 
Green Nutmeg, Montreal Improved Nutmeg, 



Montreal Large Green Nutmeg, Montreal Market 
Nutmeg, Montreal Nutmeg, Perfection Montreal, 
Perfection Montreal Nutmeg, St. Louis Market, 
Washington Market. 
The Montreal Market melon handled skillfully and 
intelligently produces the largest fruits cf its type in 
American cultivation. W. Atlee Burpee on a trip to 
Montreal in August of 1880 saw some fruits on the St. 
Ann's market. A fruit weighing over sixteen pounds was 
photographed and used to illustrate the variety when 
Burpee introduced it in 1881. The story of the success 
of this melon is as much a record of continued selec- 
tion for type as it is of extreme care in its cultivation. 
Numerous strains have been and are in existence and the 
original type remains in use today. For many years 
the better known eating places in New York City received 
melons daily from Canada to serve to their most fas- 
tidious customers. Better varieties in this country, a 
decline in demand for green fleshed sorts, and the waning 
" particular customer " trade has practically eliminated 
these shipments. 

This is a late variety at Geneva, maturing about a 
week later than Bender's Surprise and Hackensack, in 
season with Chicago Market, and about two to three 
weeks later than Early Green Nutmeg. The fruits are 
somewhat like Hackensack, differing from that variety in 
being much less oblate, considerably larger and heavier, 
usually more uniformly netted and more uniformly green 
in flesh color. It is somewhat similar to Chicago Market, 
considerably larger, and more uniformly and heavily 
netted. 

Plant very vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches many. 

Fruit very large, 8-9 x 9-10 inches; weight 9-10 pounds, 
occasionally more. Shape nearly globular, slightly flattened at 
base and apex; blossom scar moderately conspicuous; ribs prominent, 
2-2 J'2 inches broad at the medial; furrows narrow, deep and usually 
netted; occasionally smooth. Netting abundant, moderately fine 
interlaced; cork heavy, uniformly distributed over entire fruit; 
interstices moderately deep. Skin color green, irregularly mottled 
with greenish yellow. Flesh light green; medium thick, 1M _ 13^ 
inches; texture coarse, fibrous, moderately soft and juicy; sweet, 
mildly flavored, mildly aromatic; quality fair to good. Cavity very 
large, 4x4, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, ] 4 inch, moderately 
tough and strong. 

Netted Beauty. Refs. 9, 53, 63, 98, 99, 100, 127, 133, 
140. 

This melon was named and introduced in 1893 by 
Johnson & Stokes, Philadelphia. In season it was 
reputedly a few days later than Extra Early Prize and 
Jersey Bell. The melons, however, were more oval 
shaped, and had a more highly flavored pale green flesh. 

Netted Gem. Refs. 7, 14, 15, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 39, 41, 
45, 46, 47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 58, 61, 62, 63, 70, 73, 84, 
85, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 115, 121, 124, 
125, 127, 129, 132, 133, 136, 137, 140, 142, 143, 144. 
Syns. Alamo Nutmeg, Bate's Gem, Dewey Gem 
Nutmeg, Disco Gem, Early Golden Netted Gem, 
Early Model, Early Netted Gem, Extra Early 
Netted Gem, Extra Early Round Netted Gem, 
Gem, Genesee Golden Gem, Golden Gem, Golden 



82 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Jenny, Golden Jersey, Golden Netted, Golden 

Netted Gem, Green Fleshed Genesee, Green 

Netted, Improved Netted Gem, Johnson's Ring 

Leader, Little Gem, Model, New Early Victor, 

New Gem, New Mellobite, Oblong Netted Gem, 

O. K. Netted Gem, Oval Gem, Oval Netted Gem, 

Perfection Gem, Rose Gem, Round Gem, Round 

Netted Gem, Silver Netted Gem, Unequalled Gem. 

Burpee's Netted Gem introduced by W. Atlee 

Burpee in 1881 was the progenitor of the Rocky Ford 

melon. Developed from a chance cross of Nutmeg 

with some variety with larger and more oval fruits, 

Netted Gem became the accepted melon for shipping in 

all the eastern districts. Because of its possibilities as a 

shipping melon and its adaptation to growing conditions 

as found in Colorado, it ranked as the most important 

introduction of its time. From this one melon has come 

a multitude of strains and selections which have gradually 

resolved themselves into the almost perfect shipping 

melons of today. 

The original Netted Gem is no longer listed by 
American seedsmen. It has been the basis for a great 
many selections for the development of shipping melons. 
Netted Gem was a moderately early melon maturing 
about the same season as Knight and Bottomly and 
8-10 days earlier than Rocky Ford and Pollock 10— 
25. In shape it was more oval than Rocky Ford, 
distinctly more ribbed and much less netted along 
the furrows, often nearly smooth in this respect. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines medium slender; branches 
many. 

Fruit small, 5-5j^ x 4— 4 ! 2 inches; weight lJ^-2 pounds. 
Shape short oval, symmetrical and rounded at base and apex; 
blossom scar obscure; ribs moderately prominent, l l ± inches broad 
at the medial; furrows narrow, shallow and distinctly smooth. 
Netting abundant, moderately coarse laced; cork moderately heavy 
and distributed uniformly over the ribs, base and apex; interstices 
medium deep. Skin color dark green turning dark bronze yellow 
at full maturity. Flesh light green blending rather abruptly to 
delicate pink about the cavity; moderately thin, l}s~ l'j inches; 
texture medium fine, rather fibrous, firm, juicy; sweet, sprightly 
flavored and mildly aromatic; quality good. Cavity small, 2?± x 2 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, ' g inch, 
strong and moderately tough. 

New Orleans Market. Refs. 22, 41, 53, 63, 91, 96, 97, 
101, 127, 128, 133, 140. Syns. Creole, Creole 
Prize, New Orleans. 

This is an old variety which is well-known in the 
South, particularly in the New Orleans market. It is 
listed and illustrated in the 1930 catalog of Reuter 
Seed Co., New Orleans. It was cataloged by A. W. 
Livingston in 1892 and in 1895 by the Richard Frotscher 
Seed Co. 

This apparently was much like Champion Market 
in shape and size, often being a little larger. It differed 
chiefly from that variety in having heavier and decidedly 
more coarsely interlaced netting and a much less promi- 
nent blossom end scar. It also had a thinner rind and, 
obviously, was a poorer handler and keeper. 

Fruit medium large, 6-6)2 x 7-7' 2 inches; weight 4-4' 2 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, slightly flattened at the base, and 



apex full; blossom scar obscure; ribs prominent, 1 } o-2 inches broad 
at the medial; furrows broad, medium deep and smooth. Netting 
moderately abundant, coarsely interlaced; cork heavy and unevenly 
distributed over the surface, often patchy; interstices medium deep. 
Skin color greenish yellow, sparsely mottled with cream. Flesh 
light green, moderately thin, lJ-g-lM inches; texture coarse and 
fibrous, soft and juicy; sweet, fair flavor and mildly aromatic; 
quality fair to moderately good. Cavity medium large, 3x3 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, J 4 inch, rather soft and weak. 

Newport. Refs. 9, 29, 38, 53, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 133. 
Peter Henderson & Co. of New York offered this 
melon in 1892 saying that in general appearance it did 
not differ from the Hackensack except that it was a 
little smaller. It was apparently well liked by those who 
considered quality before yield and size. 

.Nixon. Refs. 89, 91, 92, 97, 125, 133. 

Before the development of the melon industry in 
Colorado and the West, the South was the leading melon 
shipping section of the country. Major John W. Nixon 
of Augusta, Georgia, was one of the pioneer growers and 
was known far and wide for his barrel shipments of 
the Nixon melon. The variety originated near Augusta 
and was advertised as a real " Georgia cantaloup " or 
" purely a southern melon." The age of the variety is 
not known but records of its use go back to 1876. 

This is a moderately late variety, maturing 4 or 5 
days earlier than Texas Cannonball, in season vrith 
Honey Mel and Rocky Ford, and 6 or 8 days later than 
Honey Rock. The fruits most resemble Texas Cannon 
Ball in shape, but are slightly smaller, more uniformly 
netted and slightly more furrowed. The skin has more 
brown pigments and the flesh is softer and tinted with 
orange about the cavity instead of solid green as with 
Texas Cannon Ball. 

Plant vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches medium in 
number. 

Fruit medium large, 5J^-6 x 5 1 9-6 inches; weight 2 3 1 -3 1 4 
pounds. Shape globular, symmetrical; base slightly depressed; 
apex full, blossom scar obscure; ribs slightly prominent, 1 3 4 inches 
broad at the medial; furrows moderately narrow, shallow and 
usually smooth to slightly netted. Netting moderately abundant, 
rather coarsely laced, often streaked; cork medium heavy, distributed 
rather uniformly over the entire surface; interstices moderately 
shallow. Skin color golden brown profusely mottled with green. 
Flesh light green with thin pale orange area adjacent to cavity; 
moderately thick, 1 J 2 — 1 : '4 inches; texture moderately coarse, 
fibrous, medium firm and juicy; very sweet, strongly flavored and 
rather pungent; quality fair to moderately poor. Cavity moderately 
small, 2 3 4 x 2 1 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, 
inch, moderately strong and medium tough. 

Nutmeg. Refs. 2, 4, 8, 20, 22, 26, 28, 29, 31, 35, 41, 43, 

44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 53, 63, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 
98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 109, 116, 
117, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131, 133, 135, 136, 139, 144. 
Syns. Alton Large Nutmeg, Arlington, Arlington 
Green Fleshed, Arlington Green Nutmeg, Arling- 
ton Nutmeg, Boston Large Nutmeg, Brooks 
Nutmeg, Early Burlington, Early Green Flesh 
Nutmeg, Early Green Nutmeg, Early Nutmeg, 
Early Prolific Nutmeg, Early Ripe, Early Round 
Nutmeg, Early Sugar Nutmeg, Extra Early Green 
Nutmeg, Extra Early Nutmeg, Fine Green Nut- 



MUSKMELONS 



83 



meg, Fine Netted, Fine Netted Nutmeg, Fine 
Nutmeg, Green-fleshed Nutmeg, Green Meated 
Nutmeg, Improved Arlington Nutmeg, Improved 
Citron Nutmeg, Improved Green Nutmeg, 
Improved Green Prolific Nutmeg, Improved 
Large Nutmeg, Improved Nutmeg, Improved 
Prolific Nutmeg, Large Green Nutmeg, Large 
Nutmeg, Netted Nutmeg, Prolific Green Nutmeg, 
Prolific Netted, Prolific Netted Nutmeg, Prolific 
Nutmeg, Small Green Nutmeg, Sugar Nutmeg. 
The name " Nutmeg " was given to the variety from 
its similarity of form to that of a nutmeg. One of the 
oldest melons known, it for many years represented a 
rather definite type but after half a century in cultiva- 
tion certain variations due to natural crossings occurred 
and today Nutmeg is perhaps more suggestive of a group 
of melons than it is of any specific melon. Green Nut- 
meg, Early Green Nutmeg, Alton Nutmeg 'introduced 
in 1865 by O. L. Barler of Alton, Illinois*, and Improved 
Green Nutmeg were among the earliest of these variations 
but represent only a few of the many names used. It 
was listed in all of the early catalogs under the brief 
description, " Nutmeg; green flesh, very sweet and fra- 
grant; early." Burr in 1863 described 12 varieties of 
melons suitable for the garden, and of those Nutmeg was 
the only small, oval, early green-fleshed variety. The 
most typical strain obtainable today is much more 
oblate than the original, and is described below. 

This is an early melon, maturing at Geneva about the 
same time as Golden Champlain and Jenny Lind, a few 
days later than Early Green Citron, and about a 
week or ten days earlier than Hackensack. The fruits 
are similar in type and shape to Hackensack, being 
decidedly smaller, less uniformly netted and more 
coarsely interlaced, with skin of a darker yellowish brown 
color. It is very similar to Early Green Citron, although 
it is slightly larger, somewhat more oblate, more pro- 
fusely netted and lacks the yellowish green flesh color 
present in that variety. 

Plant medium in vigor; vines moderately slender; branches 
many. 

Fruit moderately small, 4 ] 2-5 x 5 '2-6 inches; weight 2 ] o-3 
pounds. Shape oblate; base slightly depressed; apex even; blossom 
scar conspicuous, corky; ribs rather obscure, 1 ] £ inches broad at the 
medial; furrows narrow, shallow and smooth. Netting medium 
abundant, rather coarsely interlaced: cork medium heavy, rather 
uniformly distributed over the ribs; interstices medium deep. Skin 
color dull yellowish brown moderately mottled with green. Flesh 
light green; moderately thin, 1-1 }± inches; texture moderately coarse 
and fibrous, soft and juicy; very sweet and sprightly, strongly 
aromatic; quality fair to good. Cavity medium large, 3x3 inches, 
circular in cross-section. Rind thick, '4 inch, rather soft and tender. 

Ohio Sugar. Refs. 15, 58, 64, 65, 73, 79, 105, 109, 136. 
Syns. Green Fleshed Tip Top, Minnesota Melt- 
ing Sugar. 
The Livingston Seed Co., Columbus, Ohio, intro- 
duced this melon in 1908 as the sweetest and richest 
flavored green -fleshed melon they had ever seen. Com- 
ing from a cross made five years earlier, it had all the 
external appearance of Tip-Top and in a few years 
became more widely known as " Green Fleshed Tip Top." 



Those who knew their melons found that the flesh was a 
little less fibrous than that of Hackensack with a more 
pleasing taste, a little sweeter with a less pronounced 
musk aroma. For nearly thirty years it steadily gained 
friends, and in some sections is still considered a very 
desirable typ 

It is a moderately late variety, maturing 4-6 days 
earlier than Montreal Market, in season with Oka and 
Hale's Best and about a week later than Bender's 
Surprise. It resembles Bender's Surprise in exterior 
appearance, being less symmetrical, more unevenly 
ribbed and often more patchy in netting and skin color. 
The flesh is more greenish yellow than that of Montreal 
Market. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse and heavy; branches 
many. 

Fruit very large, 8-9 x 7-8 inches; weight 6-8 pounds; shape 
short oval to nearly globular; base slightly enlarged and depressed; 
apex full; blossom scar conspicuous, corky; ribs prominent, 1 '4 inches 
broad at the medial; furrows narrow, moderately deep and smooth. 
Netting moderately sparse, coarsely interlaced, often streaked; cork 
medium heavy, unevenly distributed over the ribs; interstices 
medium deep. Skin color creamy yellow. Flesh light green with a 
pale amber tint near the cavity; texture fine, slightly fibrous, soft 
and juicy; sweet and rather highly flavored, rather pleasantly 
aromatic; quality good. Cavity very large, 5 x 3 3 2 inches, circular 
in cross-section. Rind thick, ?4-?s inch, medium soft and rather 
tender. 

Oka. Ref. 109. 

The Montreal Melon, which for size and quality 
had few superiors as a green-fleshed sort, was used as 
one parent to produce the Oka melon. The second 
parent was the Banana, which, although of too irregular 
shape for a good market melon, possesses an unusually 
sweet, deep orange flesh. The cross was made some 
twenty-five years ago by the Rev. Father Athanase of 
the Trappist Monastery at La Trappe, Quebec. The 
melon received the name Oka from the Oka Agricultural 
Institute and the Oka monastery founded in 1720. 
Seed in this country was distributed in 1924 by Joseph 
Breck & Sons of Boston. Father Athanase who passed 
on some years ago delegated to Dupuy & Ferguson of 
Montreal the maintenance of his strain. 

It is a moderately late variety maturing 6-8 days 
earlier than Montreal Market, in season with Hale's 
Best and 4-6 days later than Bender's Surprise. It 
is similar to Irondequoit in shape and size, although it is 
somewhat less ribbed, more sparsely netted and has a 
larger, more prominent blossom scar. It is decidedly 
less ribbed and netted than Montreal Market and some- 
what more regular in shape. 

Plant vigorous; vines very coarse and heavy; branches moder- 
ately few. 

Fruit medium large; 5 1 ?— 6 x 6 l i-7 inches; weight 5-6 pounds. 
Shape globular, with base slightly enlarged, apex even; blossom scar 
conspicuous; ribs slightly prominent, somewhat paired, 1 J 4-2 inches 
broad at the medial, not uniform; furrows moderately broad and 
moderately shallow, alternate ones more shallow, smooth, occasion- 
ally slightly netted. Netting rather sparse, medium finely inter- 
laced, often short streaked; cork light, unevenly distributed over 
the ribs; interstices very shallow. Skin color creamy yellow. 
Flesh orange yellow, medium thick, l'^-l'o inches; texture coarse, 
1 fibrous, moderately sweet, mildly flavored and faintly aromatic; 



84 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



quality fair. Cavity large, 3J4-4 inches, circular in cross-section. 
Rind very thick, ? fj inch, medium strong and fairly tough. 

Oregon Delicious. Ref. 54. Syn. Golden Heart. 

Gill Bros. Seed Co. of Portland, Oregon, introduced 
this distinct new melon in 1929. It was a selection from 
the Speer melon which had been grown for many years 
by a gardener of that name at Albany, Oregon. When 
first offered many of the melons were slightly pear- 
shaped at the stem end but Gill Bros, have partly suc- 
ceeded in selecting away from this to get a more rounded 
end. The origin of the Speer melon is unknown but it 
is suspected by Gill Bros, to have been a hybrid perhaps 
with the Banana melon as one parent. The variety is 
used chiefly as a home garden and market sort. 

This is a moderately late variety maturing at 
Geneva 4 or 5 days earlier than Montreal Market, in 
season with Abbott's Pearl and Rocky Ford and a week 
or ten days later than Delicious. It most resembles 
Abbott's Pearl in general shape, but is considerably 
larger, has somewhat lighter netting which is not as 
finely interlaced. It also strongly resembles Sugar Rock 
in some respects, particularly in color of skin and type 
of netting. It is, however, much more oblong and more 
distinctly ribbed. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately coarse; branches medium in 
number. 

Fruit moderately large, 8 ' 2-9 x 6-6 '2 inches; weight 4 1 _>-5 
pounds. Shape long oval to fusiform, base decidedly extended, 
often to a snout-like protuberance; apex moderately extended; 
blossom scar obscure; ribs not prominent, 1 ' -_>-2 inches broad at 
the medial; furrows narrow, very shallow and netted. Netting 
sparse, very coarsely interlaced, often in the form of long streaks; 
cork heavy and very broad, distributed rather uniformly over the 
entire fruit; interstices moderately shallow. Skin color pale grayish 
green, later turning to creamy yellow. Flesh deep orange, medium 
thick, l'-j-l'-j inches; texture very fine, fiberless, medium firm, 
juicy; very sweet, highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality 
very good. Cavity moderately large, 5 x 2 > 2 inches, triangular 
in cross-section. Rind thick, J^ inch, strong and moderately tough. 

Osage. Refs. 4, 6, 10, 12, 15, 22, 29, 33, 36, 38, 39, 41, 
48, 50, 53, 54, 58, 64, 65, 70, 78, 79, 83, 91, 92, 
94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 
106, 108, 109, 118, 123, 125, 127, 128, 129, 133, 
136, 140, 141, 143, 144. Syns. All Meat, 
Beauty Osage, Connecticut Special, Golden Prince, 
Golden Wonder, Honey Drop, Honey Drop 
Improved, Improved Osage, Invincible, " Millers 
Cream," Netted Osage, New Orange Cream, New 
Osage, New Osage Gem, Orange Cream, Osage 
Blue Ribbon, Osage Orange Flesh, Osage Red 
Flesh, Osage Salmon Fleshed, Osage Select, 
Premium Osage, Selected A-l, Selected New 
Osage, Yellow-fleshed Osage. 
The Osage melon was probably the first of the 
many successful plant originations by Roland Morrill of 
Benton Harbor, Michigan. This is in the oldest com- 
mercial peach region in Michigan. After the yellows 
destroyed the peach industry the district turned to a 
more diversified horticulture, and planted berries and 
grapes and finally melons with a miscellaneous list of 
other vegetables. 



In 1871 William Rose and in the following year 
Mr. Morrill, began to raise melons. A few years 
later, in the search for better varieties, seeds of a melon 
grown in the county along the Osage River, in Kansas, 
were brought to Benton Harbor. This melon, some- 
times called Black Swedish, was black-green, with a 
very thick, sweet, yellow flesh, although it was small 
and round. About 1882 Miller's Cream, a long smooth 
variety of good quality was also introduced in the 
section. A natural cross was facilitated between the 
two varieties by Mr. Rose and Mr. Morrill by plant- 
ing the two kinds together. In order to obtain earli- 
ness, the improved stock was later crossed with the 
Christiana, a round netted melon, but having flesh 
which becomes soft in shipping. The new type was 
desired, above all, to be solid and durable, to have a 
thin rind, protected with a moderate netting and to 
be egg-shaped for ease in handling. 

Careful selection by Mr. Morrill of his seed melons 
each year built up a seed stock which for purity was 
noted throughout the region. In 1887 Mr. Morrill sold 
seeds of the new melon to J. C. Vaughan of Chicago, who 
introduced it under the name Osage. After forty years 
this melon still holds a firm position among the best 
American varieties, although it has been abandoned by its 
originator and by the district in which it grew to fame. 
This, however, is only because of a new variety developed 
by Mr. Morrill, the Hearts of Gold melon, which proved 
even more suited to the region. 

It is a midseason variety maturing about 4 or 5 
days earlier than Hales Best, in season with Bender's 
Surprise, and about a week later than Extra Early Osage. 
It most resembles the latter variety, although Osage 
is a trifle more ovate in shape and is less netted. It is 
distinctly more oblong and ovate than Bender's Surprise 
and is considerably finer interlaced and less netted. 
The skin color and type of netting is much like that of 
Emerald Gem. The flesh is much the same as Extra 
Early Osage in color, but in some sections it is often 
considered inferior to it in quality. 

Plant vigorous; vines heavy and coarse; branches many. 

Fruit moderately large, 7-8 x 6-6 • 2 inches; weight 5-6 pounds. 
Shape ovate, base full, somewhat enlarged; apex even; blossom scar 
small and obscure; ribs slightly prominent, l ;i 4 inches broad at the 
medial; fuiTows moderately broad, shallow and smooth. Netting 
very sparse, patchy, rather coarsely interlaced; cork medium light, 
unevenly distributed over the ribs and at the base; interstices 
moderately shallow. Skin color dark green profusely mottled with 
dull brownish yellow at full maturity. Flesh orange, medium 
thick, 1 1 4 -1 :! 8 inches; texture fine, slightly fibrous, soft and juicy; 
moderately sweet, rather mildly flavored and mildly aromatic; 
quality fair to moderately good. Cavity large, 4' 2 x 2 :i _, inches, 
triangular in crocs-section. Rind thick, moderately weak, and 
rather tender. 

Page's Early. Ref. 79. 

This was introduced in 1918, by Oscar H. Will 
& Co., Bismarck, North Dakota. That it may have 
been a hybrid sort is suggested by the warning that 
there were somewhat varied types in the original stock. 
Continued selection has perfected a rather pure strain 
noted for its earliness. 



MUSKMELONS 



85 



It is an early variety maturing about a week later 
than Early Bird and Early Green Citron, in season with 
Golden Champlain, and 4-6 days earlier than Golden 
Cream and Delicious. In exterior appearance it most 
resembles Golden Cream, being slightly smaller, less 
ovate in shape, more orange in skin color and often less 
netted. It is entirely distinct from Golden Champlain 
and other early melons in that it has decidedly less netting 
and a much more pronounced orange yellow skin color. 
The flesh is much thinner than that of Golden Cream and 
much poorer in quality. 

Plant weak; vines moderately slender, branches few. 

Fruit moderately small, 5 1 2 _ 6 x 5-5 '; inches; weight 2-3 
pounds. Shape nearly globular to short oval, rounded at the base 
and apex: blossom scar very small and obscure; ribs slightly promi- 
nent, 1 ' 4 inches broad at the medial ; furrows narrow, moderately 
shallow and smooth. Netting very sparse to absent, finely inter- 
laced and streaked; cork very light, distributed very unevenly; 
interstices very shallow. Skin color pale orange yellow. Flesh 
pale orange yellow, moderately thin, 1-1 1 4 inches; texture fine, 
fiberless, soft and juicy; slightly sweet, mildly flavored, and strongly 
aromatic: quality fair to poor. Cavity medium large, 3'_. x 2 3 4 ' 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, J £ inch, soft 
and weak. 

Paul Rose. Refs. 29, 41, 53, 64, 70, 75, 95, 97, 99, 100, 
101, 105, 108, 109, 110, 115, 116, 118, 129, 133, 
136, 140, 141, 143. Syns. Osage Gem, Petosky, 
Salmon Fleshed Gem, Salmon-fleshed Genesee. 

In the early nineties the two most important 
varieties in the Michigan cantaloupe belt were the Osage 
and the Netted Gem. Crosses between these varieties 
occurred on the farm of Roland Morrill of Benton Harbor, 
Michigan. Paul Rose of South Frankfort, Michigan, a 
neighbor and friend of Mr. Morrill, began the selection 
work which led to the introduction of the Paul Rose 
melon from plants of one of these crosses. Mr. Rose 
named his new melon Petosky, but when J. C. Vaughan 
of Chicago purchased the seed stock and introduced it 
in 1898, he renamed it the Paul Rose. This new variety 
became one of the most popular sorts ever introduced. 
It proved to be just the size required for a good market 
melon and had those characteristics of flesh and shell 
which made it " carry further and stand up longer " 
than any other sort. 

It is a midseason sort, coming into season 3 or 4 
days earlier than Burrell's Gem, in season with Hearts 
of Gold and about a week later than Delicious. The 
fruits are similar in shape to Burrell's Gem although 
somewhat shorter. The netting is similar, but is coarse 
and not as uniformly interlaced. They are much the 
same in flesh characteristics. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately heavy; branches 
moderately many. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6 ' ■> x 5-5 ] 2 inches; weight 2-2 '2 
pounds. Shape short oval, base and apex rounded, blossom scar 
moderately conspicuous; ribs slightly prominent, l'j-l 3 ^ inches 
broad at the medial: furrows distinct, moderately broad, moderately 
shallow and smooth. Netting abundant, moderately fine inter- 
laced; cork moderately light, distributed rather uniformly over the 
ribs, base and apex; interstices moderately shallow. Skin color 
dark green, slightly mottled with yellowish green at full maturity. 
Flesh salmon orange, moderately thick, 1'2-1 3 4 inches; texture 
moderately fine, slightly fibrous, rather firm, moderately juicy; 



sweet, somewhat sprightly, highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; 
quality good. Cavity moderately small, 3 '4 x 2 inches, triangular 
in cross-section. Rind medium thick, ' 3 inch, strong and tough. 

Poarl Pink Meat. Refs. 15, 54, 105. Syns. Abbott's 
Pearl, Buckskin, Pearl Pink, Pearly Pink, Pink 
Pearl. 

This melon, which was introduced in 1923 by D. V. 
Burrell, Rocky Ford, Colorado, and C. C. Morse 8s 
Co., San Francisco, has been grown with success in 
the New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland section. As 
originally introduced, the name Abbott's Pearl was 
used by C. C. Morse but was dropped after 1925. The 
name Pearl Pink Meat or Abbott's Pearl was used by 
Burrell and is the name under which the variety is 
known today. G. W. Abbott, a leading grower of 
Rocky Ford, was the originator, and perfected the stock 
after several years selection. 

This is a moderately late variety maturing at Geneva 
4 or 5 days earlier than Montreal Market, in season with 
Rocky Ford and Oregon Delicious, and about a week 
later than Sugar Rock. The variety most resembles 
Burrell's Gem and Oregon Delicious in shape, being 
much smaller than the latter and not as tapered at the 
ends as the former. The netting is most like that of 
Sugar Rock, but is much more abundant and more 
closely interlaced. 

Plant vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches moderately 
many. 

Fruit moderately small, 5 ! 2-6 x 4^4-5 inches: weight 1^-2 
pounds. Shape short oval, apex even, occasionally somewhat 
raised, base full; ribs moderately obscure; furrows narrow, very 
shallow, netted and extend from base to apex. Netting abundant, 
coarsely interlaced, somewhat circular in pattern at the ends; 
cork very heavy, distributed uniformly over the entire fruit; inter- 
stices deep; skin color grayish green, turning to pale cream at full 
maturity. Flesh orange, medium thick, 1 1 4 -1 1 2 inches; texture 
fine, moderately firm, moderately juicy, slightly fibrous; sweet, 
rather highly flavored, pleasant aroma: general quality good. 
Cavity small, 3 x 1 ' 2 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
medium thick, } g inch, tough and strong. 

Peerless Pearl. Ref. 54. Syn. Abbott's Peerless Pearl. 
This was a selection from Abbott's Pearl and was 
introduced in 1928 by D. V. Burrell, Rocky Ford, 
Colorado. With the exception of the paper-white seed 
it was similar in most respects to Pearl Pink Meat. 

Plant vigorous; vines moderately heavy; branches moderately 
many. 

Fruit moderately small, 5}/£-6 x 4j£-5 inches; weight 2-2' 
pounds. Shape short oval, base full to slightly extended, apex 
even ; blossom scar obscure ; ribs obscure, 1 ? ' 4 inches broad at the 
medial; furrows very narrow and very shallow, netted. Netting 
very abundant, moderately fine interlaced; cork very heavy and 
thick, distributed uniformly over the entire fruit; interstices deep. 
Skin color pale grayish green. Flesh salmon orange, medium thick, 
1-1 '4 inches; texture slightly coarse and fibrous, firm and moder- 
ately juicy; sweet, highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality 
very good. Cavity moderately small, 3 ] 2 x 2 l > inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind thick, ! 4 inch, very strong and tough. Seeds 
white. 

Perfected Delmonico. Refs. 11, 29, 97, 98, 100, 133. 

This was a selection from Delmonico which was 

introduced in 1889 by Peter Henderson. The new 

melon offered by that concern in 1894 was smaller in 



86 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



size and nearly a perfect globe shape. This strain 
replaced the older Delmonico and was considered rather 
superior in quality, but the variety was not offered after 
1906. 

Perfection. Refs. 22, 23, 26, 33, 38, 39, 48, 53, 60, 61, 
62, 73, 88, 91, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 105, 107, 124, 
125, 133, 140, 144. Syns. Mammoth Perfection, 
Minnesota Perfection, New Princess, Princess, 
The Princess, Yellow Fleshed Perfection. 
The Perfection melon appears to have been intro- 
duced by Wm. Henry Maule, Philadelphia, Pa., in 1889. 
According to the story in their catalog for that year, 
seeds had been secured from a customer from Chenango 
County, N. Y. The variety was rather widely cataloged. 
A very similar melon was offered in 1892 under the name 
Princess by Johnson & Stokes of Philadelphia. This 
was said to have originated as a chance seedling in a 
field of melons near Boston, Mass. 

Fruit medium large, 6-7 x 5-6 inches; weight 4 , o-6 pounds. 
Shape short oval to nearly globular, slightly depressed about the 
base, apex full; blossom scar obscure; ribs moderately prominent, 
l 1 -1 ! inches broad at the medial; furrows medium broad, deep 
and smooth. Netting abundant, coarsely interlaced; cork heavy 
and rather uniformly distributed over the ribs; interstices moderately 
deep. Skin color deep orange sparsely mottled with green. Flesh 
orange yellow; moderately thick, lj<&— 1% inches; texture coarse 
and fibrous, soft and juicy; very sweet, highly flavored and mildly 
aromatic; quality good to very good. Cavity moderately small, 
3-3 \ ■_> x 2-2 J L > inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, } j inch, 
strong and moderately tough. 

Persian. Refs. 3, 15, 22, 30, 38, 57, 58, 92, 105, 108, 
109, 110, 127, 133, 139. 

Although a great many varieties of this type are 
grown in Asia Minor, there are few grown in this country. 
The most important sort is known as Persian or Armenian 
and is of chief importance in the hot valleys of southern 
and central California and in Arizona. The Persian is a 
large fruited sort, 7-10 inches in diameter in both dimen- 
sions, nearly globular in shape, without ribs, and profusely 
and uniformly covered with a rather light, moderately 
broad netting. The flesh is very thick, pink in color, 
very fine textured and, when properly harvested and 
stored, has a good flavor and distinctly pleasant aroma. 
When allowed to remain on the vine until a partial 
slip of the stem is possible, the skin assumes a yellow or 
a slightly red tint. Fruits picked for long shipments, 
however, have a moderately dark green skin color. 

The Turkish melon is another of this type, but is 
oblong in shape and distinctly ribbed. It is of little 
importance in American trade at the present time. 

Pineapple. Refs. 20, 24, 26, 38, 42, 44, 45, 46, 90, 92, 
93, 108, 133, 138, 142. Syns. Gautner's Pine- 
apple, Green Fleshed Pineapple, Improved Pine- 
apple, Murray's Pineapple, Netted Pineapple, 
Pineapple Citron, Rocky Ford Pineapple. 

The name occurred in the catalog of Breck, 1838, 
and G. Thorburn & Sons, 1824. Little is known about 
the variety, for the descriptions in early catalogs were 



short and since there were few varieties known, com- 
parisons with similar sorts were not possible. Hovey in 
1859 describes Pineapple; as " Green flesh, sweet, a 
superior variety." In the Gardeners' Chronicle of 1841 
it is mentioned as a desirable variety. Undoubtedly the 
type as known in early times changed somewhat, and 
the name was later used for some of the Nutmeg, Citron, 
and Netted Gem strains. 

Pollock 10-25. Refs. 15, 17, 36, 54, 58, 64, 65, 72, 78, 
79, 95, 105, 109, 110, 129. Syns. Golden Pollock, 
Improved Pollock, Missionary Belle, Mission Bell, 
Pollock, Pollock Rocky Ford, Queen of Gems, 
Rust Resistant Pollock, Ten Twenty-five. 

While working to improve the separate strains of 
Pollock No. 25, P. K. Blinn and James B. Ryan selected 
and planted separately seed from melons with thick 
salmon-colored flesh. After five years one of these 
strains proved to be superior and was in 1916 named 
Salmon Tint Pollock 10-25 and introduced by the 
Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed Breeders Association. For 
ten years this strain was the standard of comparison for 
all other varieties in the Rocky Ford group. 

The variety is 5 or 6 days earlier than Texas Cannon 
Ball, in season with Rocky Ford and Edwards Perfecto, 
and 6-8 days later than Sugar Rock. It is much like 
Rocky Ford in exterior appearance, being somewhat more 
uniformly globular than that variety and the flesh has a 
larger percentage of orange color flesh near the cavity. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines moderately heavy; branches 
moderately few. 

Fruit moderately small, 5-5 ] 2 x 5-5 ] 2 inches; weight 1 J j-2 
pounds. Shape globular, symmetrical; base full, occasionally 
slightly extended; apex even; blossom scar obscure; ribs and furrows 
absent. Netting abundant, finely interlaced; cork moderately 
heavy, distributed evenly over entire fruit; interstices medium deep. 
Skin color dark green. Flesh light green with a prominent salmon 
orange area about the cavity, medium thick, l'j'-l'u inches; texture 
slightly coarse and fibrous, moderately firm and rather juicy; sweet 
and sprightly, rather highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic, 
quality good. Cavity small, 2} » x 1 ;, 4 inches, triangular in cross- 
section. Rind medium thick, Yi, inch, strong and tough. 

Pollock No. 25. Refs. 15, 58, 64, 105, 109, 110, 121, 129. 
Syns. Gold Fleshed Rocky Ford, May view 
Favorite, Orange Fleshed Rocky Ford, Orange 
Flesh Pollock, Pink Fleshed Rocky Ford, Pink 
Meat Netted Rock, Pink Meated Rocky Ford, 
Pollock Pink, Rocky Ford Pink Meat, Salmon 
Flesh Eden Gem, Salmon-fleshed Netted Gem, 
Salmon-fleshed Rocky Ford, Salmon Tinted 
Pollock, Salmon Tinted Pollock No. 25. 

The Pollock type has been gradually developed and 
improved at Rocky Ford, Colorado for the last 40 years. 
In 1895 J. P. Pollock at Holbrook began to grow melons 
and started selection of a new type from the Rocky 
Ford or Netted Gem. Mr. Pollock saved seed from 
plants most resistant to rust and by chance these plants 
produced fruits which were less ribbed and more heavily 
netted than the original stock. The selection became 
known as the Pollock strain. This showed a tendency 
to some color variation. In some specimens the salmon 



MUSKMELONS 



87 



coloring showed as a clean cut zone around the seed 
cavity with a green layer near the rind, in others the green 
and salmon colors were mottled or blended together 
and in still ethers the colors were in irregular patches, 
possibly the green on one side and the salmon color on 
the other. In some melons the whole flesh was a solid 
salmon color and in others the flesh was entirely green. 
Some years later P. K. Blinn and James B. Ryan 
separated this original variable stock into two strains. 

In 1909 the Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed Breeders 
Association introduced these strains as Rust-resistant 
Pollock No. 25, Green Meat and Salmon Tint. They 
were immediately popular and were widely adopted 
both in Colorado and the Imperial Valley in California. 

Reedland Giant. Refs. 29, 33, 47, 53, 90, 96, 133. 

Syn. Reedland 's Giant Citron. 
One of the very largest melon varieties to be offered, 
the Reedland, was not of good uniform quality and 
never became very popular. Because of its size it was 
often called The King of the Cantaloups. It was listed 
by Landreth and by Vaughan in 1887. The flesh was 
green and quite highly flavored but rather thin and, 
therefore, not suitable for handling. 

Kit tollhouse Special. 

This melon was offered in 1927 by Vaughan's 
Seed Store, Chicago. It was one of the latest varieties 
matured at Geneva, in season with Weaver Special and 
Honey Ball and 4-6 days later than Montreal Market. 
It is similar to Bender's Surprise in shape but is much 
less ribbed. The netting is similar to that of Carolina 
Clark while the skin color is much the same as Sugar 
Rock. 

Plant vigorous; vines coarse and heavy; branches many. 

Fruit moderately large, 7-7 'i x 6— 6 ] 2 inches; weight 5-6 
pounds. Shape nearly globular to short oval, slightly flattened at 
base and apex; blossom scar rather conspicuous, often bordered with 
a corky ring; ribs obscure; furrows very shallow, rather narrow 
and usually slightly netted. Netting sparse, coarsely interlaced, 
often streaked; cork light, unevenly distributed over the surface; 
interstices shallow. Skin color pale bluish green later turning to 
grayish green, sparsely mottled with pale creamy yellow. Flesh 
orange; medium thick, \\i inches; texture fine, fiberless, soft and 
juicy; sweet, rather highly flavored and distinctly aromatic, quality 
good. Cavity large, 4x3 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
thick, l i inch, rather weak and moderately tender. 

Rocky Dew. 

The Kilgore Seed Co., Plant City, Florida, first 
offered this new variety in their 1934 catalog. According 
to the introductory statement it was discovered in the 
West Indies by a representative of the Kilgore Company. 
Repeated tests in Florida and other southeastern districts 
showed that it was particularly adapted to growing 
conditions as found in the South. 

This was one of the latest melons grown at Geneva, 
maturing about a week or ten days later than Rocky 
Ford, 3-4 days later than Montreal Market and Giant. 
The fruits are more oblong, more tapered at the base 
and considerably less netted than those of Rocky Ford. 
The skin color is similar to that of Honey Dew, although 
in the earlier stages it is a much darker green. The flesh, 



although somewhat thinner, is much like that of Honey 
Dew in color and texture. 

Fruit moderately small, 6-6 ' •_> x 4 ' _. 5 inches; weight I 
pounds. Shape oval, somewhat tapered at the base; apex rounded, 
even; blossom scar conspicuous; ribs obscure; furrows narrow, very 
shallow and smooth. Netting sparse, very finely streaked; cork 
very light, unevenly distributed over the ribs; interstices shallow. 
Skin color greenish yellow later turning to bright yellow. Flesh 
bright green, moderately thick, 1 ' _. 1 ; , inches; texture fine, fiberless, 
very firm and moderately juicy; sweet, sprightly, highly flavored 
and pleasantly aromatic; quality good. Cavity small, 3 ' i x 1 ' _. 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, ' g inch, 
moderately hard and tough. 

Rocky Ford. Refs. 5, 15, 16, 18, 19, 26, 29, 41, 45, 53, 

54, 58, 63, 64, 65, 70, 72, 73, 75, 85, 97, 100, 101, 
102, 105, 108, 109, 110, 116, 117, 121, 123, 133, 
136, 137, 140, 141, 143. Syns. Blue Ribbon Gem, 
Blue Ribbon Rocky Ford, Buskirk, Buskirk's 
Blight Proof, Colorado, Delicious Gold Lined, 
Delicious Rocky Ford, Early Victor, Eden Gem, 
Eden Gem Select, Emerald and Gold, Extra Select 
Rocky Ford, Gem of Eden, Golden Gem Rocky 
Ford, Golden Sugar, Gold Lined, Gold Lined Net- 
ted Rocky Ford, Gold Lined Rocky Ford, Green 
Fleshed Rocky Ford, Hart's Victor, Honey Sweet, 
Ideal Eden Gem, Improved Rocky Ford, Improved 
Rust Resistant, Johnson's Colorado, Junior Rocky 
Ford, Mammoth Rocky Ford, Melting Gold, 
Money Maker, Nebraska Gold Lined, Netted 
Rock, Netted Rock King, Oklahoma, Perfected 
Rocky Ford, Perfection Rocky Ford, Pineapple 
Rocky Ford, Robinson's Delicious, Rock King, 
Rocky Ford Gem, Rocky Ford Netted Gem, 
Rocky Ford Nutmeg, Rocky Ford Rust Resistant, 
Rocky Ford Selected, Rust Proof Rocky Ford, 
Select Solid Net, Solid Rock, Sweetmeat, Ten to 
One, Van Buskirk Netted King, Van Buskirk's 
Netted Rock, Victor, Victory, Ward's Ideal, 
Watter's Solid Net, Watter's Solid Net Rocky 
Ford. 
Burpee's Netted Gem under the favorable con- 
ditions which prevailed in the arid regions of Colorado 
was developed into a melon surpassing in appearance 
and quality the parent stock. This was called the Rocky 
Ford. The honor of growing the first Rocky Ford melons 
for market is accredited to J. W. Eastwood who in 1885 
planted about one -half acre of Netted Gem seed received 
direct from Burpee. The same season J. E. Gauger near 
La Junta also tried a small planting of the Netted Gem. 
In succeeding years the extent of the melon industry in 
this region greatly increased and it was natural that the 
melons shipped from there should come to be known 
as Rocky Fords. Many selections were made and it is 
possible that some natural crossing occurred. 

Within the group of Rocky Ford melons there has 
come into existence a large number of variety or strain 
names. The majority of these strains represent a 
gradual change from the original oblong, smooth- 
furrowed Netted Gem to the globular, heavily netted 
melon of today. Attention is called to the Pollock 
strains and to Hale's Best which are treated elsewhere. 



88 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



These belong in the same group, but because of certain 
superior qualities, became major sorts, even displacing 
Rocky Ford itself. 

It is a moderately late variety, maturing 5-6 days 
earlier than Montreal Market, in season with Pollock 
10 25 and Perfecto and 4-6 days later than Hearts 
of Gold. It is practically the same as Pollock 10-25 
in exterior appearance, the fruits being slightly more 
oval. The flesh has a greater percentage of green with 
a narrower yellowish gold lining about the cavity instead 
of a rather broad orange colored area. The present 
day stocks are much heavier netted, less furrowed and 
more globular in shape than the original Netted Gem. 

Plant vigorous: vines moderately heavy; branches moderately 
many. 

Fruit moderately small, 4 I o-5 1 2 x 4-5 inches, weight 1 J j-2 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, base and apex rounded and full; 
blossom scar obscure; ribs obscure, 1%~1% inches broad at the 
medial; furrows very shallow, narrow and netted. Netting abun- 
dant, finely interlaced; cork moderately heavy and distributed 
uniformly over the entire surface; interstices moderately deep. 
Skin color dark green, later becoming mottled with yellowish bronze. 
Flesh green with a narrow gold lining about the cavity; moderately 
thin, 1-1 '4 inches; texture rather coarse and slightly fibrous, medium 
firm and juicy; very sweet and sprightly, rather highly flavored 
and pleasantly aromatic; quality good. Cavity small, 2U x 2 
inches, triangular in cross-section. Rind medium thick, } 5 - ) 4 inch, 
strong and tough. 

Sill's Hybrid. Refs. 8, 43, 45, 46, 98, 99, 134. Syn. 
Sill's. 
This was a melon offered in 1870 by James J. H. 
Gregory & Sons of Marblehead, Massachusetts. Many 
of the early descriptions compared the variety to White 
Japan, especially in earliness and sweetness. Some 
considered it to be a cross between White Japan and 
Christiana. This type was the progenitor of melons 
in the Osage and Surprise group. 

Silver Netted. Refs. 29, 133. 

This variety was the forerunner of the better known 
Texas Cannon Ball. It was known as Shumway's Silver 
Netted and was described as having resulted from a cross 
between a French Cantaloupe and an American musk- 
melon. It was listed by R. H. Shumway of Rockford, 
Illinois sometime previous to 1894. 

Six Oaks. Refs. 10, 29, 53, 97, 98, 99, 100. 

James J. H. Gregory 8b Sons of Marblehead, Mas- 
sachusetts, introduced the Six Oaks Cantaloupe in 1894. 
The melons were green-fleshed, deeply ribbed, well netted 
and nearly round in shape. From the illustration shown 
this was a melon quite similar to the Hackensack but 
less flattened and larger. 

Skillman's Netted. Refs. 20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 45, 46, 49, 

52, 53, 55, 96, 99, 100, 105, 108, 127, 131, 133, 
136, 138, 139, 140, 145. Syns. Skillman, Skill- 
man's Early, Skillman's Fine Netted, Skillman's 
Green, Skillman's Netted Gem, Skillman's Netted 
Nutmeg. 
This is one of the oldest named varieties of which we 
have definite record. Listed by Hovey in 1834 and 
Thorburn in 1837 and mentioned by Bridgman in 1857, 



Watson 1860 and Burr 1863, this constitutes a record for 
age that few American varieties possess. Likewise we 
find that it has continued in use until recent times, for 
the name occurs in the 1918 catalog of Cadwell & Jones 
and in 1923 for Carters Tested Seeds, Inc. Early 
descriptions indicate that it was a subvariety of Green 
Nutmeg and was known as the earliest of the green- 
fleshed sorts. 

The fruits matured early, about in season with 
Early Green Nutmeg. It apparently was very much 
like that variety in shape but was smaller, more distinctly 
ribbed and more finely netted and interlaced. 

Fruit small, 4— 4 ] 2 x 4-4 1 inches; weight 1-1 ' 2 pounds. 
Shape globular, base slightly flattened and depressed about the 
stem, apex full; ribs moderately prominent, furrows broad, moder- 
ately shallow and netted. Netting abundant, finely interlaced, 
distinctly streaked and circular in pattern about the base and 
apex; cork moderately light, distributed uniformly over the surface, 
interstices shallow. Skin color dark bronze buff at full maturity. 
Flesh green, moderately thin, 1-1 '4 inches; texture moderately 
coarse, tender; very sweet; quality good. Cavity very small, 
2 x l 1 ! inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, J4 -?s inch, 
moderately strong and tough. 

Southern Beauty. Refs. 53, 96, 97, 99, 100, 103. 

Little is known of the history of this variety or 
the extent to which it was grown. The first listing of 
the variety was found in the 1895 catalog of the Lovett 
Company of Little Silver, New Jersey. It was listed 
by Vaughan in 1897 and by Griffith and Turner in 
1902. The latter firm recommended it as particularly 
suited to the southern climate. The flesh was thick, 
green, and had a rich, spicy or aromatic flavor. 

Spicy. Ref. 136. 

The Spicy melon is strikingly distinct in the quality 
and flavor of the flesh. The original seed came from 
a grower in Minden, Louisiana, where it was seen in 
1906 by a Burpee representative. After testing for 
three more seasons, the variety was introduced in 1910 
by W. Atlee Burpee. The quality of Spicy has been 
likened to that of some of the greenhouse grown foreign 
melons. Although the variety name has continued 
until recently in the Burpee catalogs, it has not been 
generally listed by other concerns. 

It was a late variety, 3-4 days earlier than Giant, 
in season with Montreal Market and 10 days or two 
weeks later than Hale's Best. It is most like Golden 
Cream in shape and netting characteristics. The skin 
is more like that of Honey Ball, although the flesh is 
orange instead of green. 

Fruit medium large, 6'o-7 x 4 '2-5 '4' inches; weight 3-3 '2 
pounds. Shape moderately long oval; base full and rounded; apex 
rounded; blossom scar corky and conspicuous; ribs slightly promi- 
nent; 1 ' _>-2 inches broad at the medial; furrows medium narrow, 
medium depth and smooth. Netting very sparse, finely interlaced 
and very short streaked; cork very light, unevenly distributed over 
the surface. Skin color pale lemon yellow. Flesh pale orange, 
medium thick, l^'-l 3 s inches; texture fine, fiberless, moderately 
soft and juicy; sweet, sprightly, highly flavored and pleasantly 
aromatic; quality good. Cavity medium large, 4 ' 4 x 2 ' _. inches, 
triangular in cross-section. Rind moderately thin, ' , inch, light 
yellow, rather soft and tender. 



MUSKMELONS 



89 



Superior. Refs. 29, 33, 38, 53, 96, 97, 100, 127, 133, 144. 
Syn. New Superior. 
This melon originated with a grower in New Jersey 
and was introduced in 1892 by W. Atlee Burpee of 
Philadelphia. The illustration shows a melon nearly 
round, without ribbing, but covered with a heavy dense 
netting. 

Supreme. Ref. 60. Syn. Giant Emerald Gem. 

Child's Supreme muskmelon was introduced in 1918 
by John Lewis Childs, Inc. of Floral Park, N. Y. It was 
originated by George Ashworth, Locust Valley, Long 
Island. It was a late variety which matured about in 
season with Montreal Market and 6 8 days later than 
Hollybrook Luscious. It was similar to the latter 
in shape and skin color but was considerably larger 
than that variety and had a deeper orange colored flesh. 

Fruit very large, 9-10 x 7-8 inches; weight 10-12 pounds. 
Shape oblong, rather lopsided, base full and rounded, apex full, 
often with rather prominent navel; blossom scar very conspicuous; 
ribs prominent, variable in width; furrows broad, irregular in depth, 
smooth. Netting practically absent, when present very fine and 
patchy. Skin color very dark green. Flesh deep orange yellow, 
moderately thick, lj^-l?4 inches; texture fine, fiberless, rather firm 
and juicy; sweet, rather highly flavored and distinctly aromatic; 
quality very good. Cavity very large, 5x4 inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind thin, J 8 inch, very soft and weak. 

Surprise. Refs. 4, 6, 15, 22, 25, 26, 28, 29, 43, 44, 45, 

46, 48, 49, 53, 70, 84, 90, 91, 98, 99, 100, 101, 

105, 107, 108, 109, 124, 127, 128, 133, 136, 139, 144. 

Syns. Baker, Early Surprise, Extra Selected 

New Surprise, New Surprise, Telephone, Young's 

Selected Surprise. 

The Surprise melon, introduced in 1876 by Price 

and Knickerbocker of Albany, N. Y., was considered 

the greatest contribution to the list of melon varieties 

of that period. This judgment was well founded for 

the type, represented first by Surprise and successively 

by Irondequoit, Tip Top, Bender Surprise and Baker's 

Surprise, has been one of the best groups for the local 

market and roadside stand. The exact origin of the 

variety is unknown. Mr. Price, who was responsible 

for its selection and introduction, left no record of the 

varieties entering into its parentage. By many it was 

considered to have come from a cross between White 

Japan and Sill's Hybrid. 

It is a midseason sort maturing 3 or 4 days earlier 
than Hale's Best, in season with Osage, and 3 or 4 days 
later than Bender. It is most like Bender, differing 
from that variety in being smaller, more irregularly 
ribbed and less uniformly netted. The flesh is paler 
orange in color, somewhat thinner and coarser in texture. 

Plant vigorous; vines heavy; branches many. 

Fruit moderately large, 7-8 x 5 ' L >-6 inches; weight 6-7 pounds. 
Shape short oval to nearly globular, often slightly lopsided, base 
slightly flattened, apex full; blossom scar not very conspicuous; ribs 
prominent, 1 :! t inches broad, irregular; furrows broad, moderately 
shallow to deep, smooth. Netting sparse, patchy, often streaked; 
cork moderately heavy, distributed very unevenly over the surface. 
Skin color light creamy yellow. Flesh light orange; medium thick, 
'Jj-l'j inches; texture medium coarse and rather fibrous, soft and 
juicy: sweet, very mildly flavored and faintly aromatic; quality 



fair to moderately good. Cavity large, 4x3 inches, circular in 
cross-section. Rind moderately thin, ' s inch, soft and weak. 

Tip Top. Refs. 6, 15, 29, 53, 54, 58, 64, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 105, 109, 110, 115, 128, 129, 140, 141. Syns. 
Mosley Tip Top, Nutmeg Tip Top. 
A. W. Livingston's Sons, Columbus, Ohio, offered 
Tip Top in 1892. The history of this variety, accord- 
ing to the Livingston catalog, is that a gentleman living 
in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, discovered a peculiar 
melon growing in a neighbor's field where various kinds 
were planted for market, among them Surprise, Hacken- 
sack, Jenny Lind, and others. Out of curiosity it was 
cut and tested for quality, with the result that all 
present were astonished at its excellence. Seed saved 
from this melon was carried to Ohio and planted there. 
The fruits proved to be " Tip Top " in every particular. 
When introduced into California this melon soon became 
one of the leading sorts. Tip Top belongs in the Sur- 
prise group which produces the greater part of the 
large sized salmon-fleshed melons found on our markets. 
It is so similar to Irondequoit that today the two are 
considered practically synonymous. 

Triumph. Refs. 26, 29, 53, 60, 97, 98, 99, 100, 133. 
Syns. Beck's Triumph, New Triumph, Triumph 
Hybrid. 

This variety was offered for the first time in 1895 by 
A. W. Livingston's Sons, Columbus, Ohio. Seed had 
been secured from Antone Beck of Oregon, Illinois. 
Mr. Beck was also the originator of the Columbus melon, 
a green -fleshed sort which he crossed with Osage to 
produce the Triumph. 

It was a midseason sort, 4-5 days later than Extra 
Early Hackensack and in season with Long Island 
Beauty. The fruits were similar to Extra Early Hacken- 
sack in size and shape, although usually more globular 
and not as uniformly netted. 

Fruit medium large, 6-6 '2 x 6— 6 ] 2 inches; weight 2'o'-3 
pounds. Shape globular, often slightly flattened at the ends; 
blossom scar large and corky, conspicuous; ribs slightly prominent, 
l%—iy& inches broad at the medial; furrows broad, shallow and 
smooth. Netting rather sparse, medium finely interlaced; cork 
rather light and unevenly distributed over the ribs. Skin color 
very dark green later turning to dull orange brown, profusely mottled 
with cream color. Flesh light green, moderately thin, 1-1 '4 inches; 
texture coarse and fibrous, soft and juicy; very sweet, mildly flavored 
and mildly aromatic; quality fair to moderately good. Cavity 
moderately large, 3% x 3 inches, circular in cross-section. Rind 
thick, J 4 inch, rather soft and weak. 

Tye. Syn. Early Tye. 

This melon probably came from an accidental cross 
between one of the American varieties and a melon of 
the extra early Russian type such as Page's Early. It 
bears the name Tye because it was discovered and 
improved by Otis A. Tye of Yucca, North Dakota. 
Oscar H. Will & Co. of Bismarck, North Dakota, have 
been growing strains of this melon for twenty years, and 
that offered in their catalog of 1934 is recommended for 
both earliness and quality. 

The variety is a moderately early one at Geneva, 
maturing 4 or 5 days earlier than Acme, in season with 



90 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Extra Early Osage, and 4 or 5 days later than Golden 
Champlain and Fordhook. In shape it resembled Acme 
and Knight, although it was considerably less netted 
than those varieties. The skin color was much like 
that of Bender, and the flesh somewhat lighter orange. 

Plant weak: vines slender; branches few. 

Fruit moderately small; 6-6 >_> x 4-4 , _. inches, weight 2-2 J i 
pounds. Shape long oval, occasionally somewhat fusiform: base 
full to slightly extended: apex raised; blossom scar obscure, ribs 
slightly prominent, 1 ) _> inches broad at the medial; furrows medium 
broad, rather shallow and netted. Netting moderately sparse, 
coarsely interlaced and streaked; cork moderately heavy and broad, 
distributed unevenly over the surface; interstices moderately shallow. 
Skin color creamy yellow. Flesh orange; moderately thin, 1—1 ] 4 
inches; texture very fine, fiberless, soft and moderately juicy, 
moderately sweet, mildly flavored and mildly aromatic; quality 
fair to poor. 

Ward's Nectar. Refs. 25, 28, 29, 44, 46, 51, 53, 91, 
93, 94, 98, 99, 100, 127, 131, 133, 134, 144. 
Ward's Nectar is recorded as being listed in 1849 
by Hovey, 1869 by Gregory and 1883 by Hender- 
son. In 1886 after being grown in the trials at Geneva 
the following was written: " The Golden Netted Gem, 
Jenny Lind and this are all subvarieties of one variety, 
and this variety is the smaller prototype of the Green 
Citron or Early Nutmeg." Well developed fruits were 
4 inches in diameter in both directions; flesh green with 
a yellowish line next the seeds; very tender, sweet and 
delicious. 

Weaver Special. Refs. 54, 81. Syns. Imperial, 
Imperial Special, Special Imperial White Melon, 
Sunkist. 

Weaver Special, which under the name of Sunkist 
was given an Award of Merit in the 1935 All -America 
rating, seems destined to become one of the leading 
standard varieties both for shipping and the home 
garden. In 1930, J. C. Fluke, who was the manager at 
Brawley, California, for C. H. Weaver Co., discovered 
a white-skinned melon which he believed was a promis- 
ing type. After two years, the type seemed fairly well 
fixed and seed was then sent to James B. Ryan, a melon 
grower of long experience and one of the founders of the 
Rocky Ford Cataloupe Seed Breeders Association, for 
further development and improvement. 

Mr. Ryan and his associates carried on selective 
work for six generations in order to eliminate some of the 
undesirable characteristics of the new variety. At the 
suggestion of Mr. Fluke the name Weaver Special was 
selected. The parentage of the variety is unknown. By 
some it is though to have come from a cross between 
Honey Ball and Hale's Best but no definite record is 
available. 

This is a late melon which matured at Geneva a week 
or ten days later than Bender's Surprise, 4 or 5 days later 



than Honeymel, and in season with Honey Ball. The 
fruits most resemble Honeymel in general appearance, 
differing from that variety in being more globular, more 
profusely and uniformly netted and in having an orange 
colored flesh. It is similar to the Honey Dew in color 
of skin, but lacks the size and flesh color of that variety. 

Plant moderately vigorous; vines moderately heavy; branches 
many. 

Fruit moderately small, 5} 2-6 x 5 ] 2-6 inches; weight 2J-2— 3 
pounds. Shape globular, symmetrical, blossom scar obscure; 
ribs and furrows absent. Netting abundant, moderately fine 
interlaced; cork light, uniformly distributed over the surface; 
interstices shallow. Skin color pale creamy yellow tinted with 
green. Flesh orange; medium thick, l^-ljo inches; texture fine, 
very slightly fibrous, moderately firm and rather juicy; very sweet, 
rather highly flavored and pleasantly aromatic; quality very good. 
Cavity small, 2 Jo x l'i inches, triangular in cross-section. Rind 
thick, ' 4 inch, greenish yellow, strong and tough. 

White Japan. Refs. 1, 4, 25, 26, 28, 44, 46, 49, 53, 
55, 63, 66, 98, 99, 100, 105, 127, 130, 133, 136, 144. 

Syns. American Beauty, Early White Japan, 
Improved White Japan, Japan, Japan Silver- 
striped White, New White Japan. White Japanese, 
Yellow Fleshed Japan, Yellow Meated Japan. 

This melon was one of the earlier varieties, having 
been mentioned by Burr in 1863. It was understood 
to have been brought to this country by a member of 
Commodore Perry's Japanese Expedition of 1853-54. 
Wm. S. Carpenter, horticulturist of New York introduced 
the melon to the public and it was listed by Gregory in 
1866 and Bliss in 1868. Inasmuch as the color of this 
melon excited particular notice, it is probable that this 
was the first variety with this characteristic offered in 
this country. 

White Japan produced mature fruits at Geneva in 
midseason, about 3 or 4 days earlier than Benders 
Surprise, in season with Sugar Rock, and about 3 or 4 
days later than Delicious. It was similar to Bender's 
Surprise in general appearance, but differed from that 
variety in being smaller, less symmetrical, less uniformly 
netted, and in having paler orange flesh color. 

Plant vigorous; vines heavy and coarse; branches moderately 
few. 

Fruit medium large; 6-6 'j x 6 ] 2~7 inches; weight 3^ -i— 4- 
pounds. Shape nearly globular, slightly flattened at base and apex; 
blossom scar large and conspicuous, corky ; ribs rather prominent, 
1 ] 2— 1?4 inches broad at the medial: furrows medium broad, medium 
depth and usually smooth, occasionally netted. Netting rather 
sparse, coarsely interlaced often long streaked; cork heavy, dis- 
tributed unevenly over the ribs: interstices moderately deep. Skin 
color creamy yellow. Flesh pale orange, medium thick, 1 ' 4-1 ] 2 
inches: texture slightly coarse and moderately fibrous, soft and 
juicy; moderately sweet, mildly flavored and mildly aromatic; 
quality fair to moderately good. Cavity medium large, 3'; x3 
inches, circular in cross-section. Rind thick, J .4 inch, medium soft 
and rather tender. 



MUSKMELONS 



91 



SUPPLEMENTARY LIST OF OBSCURE VARIETIES 



The names given below represent varieties which 
are of minor importance and about which little informa- 
tion is available; varieties which were in existence for 



a very short period; or varieties the seed of which is not 
available today. 



Albany Market. Ref. 133. 

All the Year. 

Ambulance. Ref. 133. 

American Breakfast. Ref. 133. 

Andalusia. 

Angelo. Ref. 75. 

Augusta Market. Refs. 40, 97, 

133. 
Autumn. Ref. 133. 
Berkley. Ref. 133. 
Bittners Blight-proof. 
Black African. 
Black Jap. Refs. 5. 133. 
Black Paris. Ref. 97. 
Black Swedish. 
Borneo. Ref. 55. 
Brant. 

Breakfast Delight. 
Buckbee 555. Ref. 100. 
Buckner. 
California Giant. 
Cape. 

Cape May. Ref. 133. 
Carbonkel. 
Carolina Clark 
Center Melon. Ref. 3. 
Cincinnati Market. Refs. 53, 

133. 
Coral Reef. Ref. 133. 
Core. 
Coming. 

Cream. Ref. 133. 
Cross, Remer's. Ref. 36. 
Cyprus. Ref. 108. 
Dandy. 
Dee-licious. 

Dickman's Best. Ref. 133. 
Dominion Day. Ref. 133. 
Dominion Green-fleshed. Ref. 

133. 
Dunlop. 

Early Bristol. Refs. 26, 53, 133. 
Early Green Japanese. Ref. 

108. 
Early Hybrid. 



Early June. Ref. 133. 

Early Market. 

Early Polignac. 

Early Prize. Ref. 29. 

Early Yellow. Ref. 133. 

Extra Early Prize. Refs. 26, 

53, 133. 
Extra Early Roof. Ref. 101. 
Free Lunch. 

French Perfection. Ref. 133. 
Golden Jewel. 
Golden Rock. 
Golden Seal. 
Golden Superb. Refs. 43, 44, 

45. 
Golden Triumph. 
Golden West. 
Gold Winner. 
Good Traveler. 

Grand View. Refs. 48, 1 1 , 1 33 . 
Great Combination. Refs. 9, 

10, 133. 
Green and Gold. Ref. 133. 
Green Gage. 
Green Japan. 
Growers Pride. Refs. 33, 45, 

92, 133. 
Hamilton Market. Ref. 133. 
Honey Heart. 
Honfleur. Refs. 108, 139. 
Hoosier King. Syn. Hoosier. 

Ref. 133. 
Hoover. 

Hope. Ref. 81. 
Hunter. Ref. 3, 106, 138. 
Ice King. 
Idaho Wonder. 
Iowa Mastodon. Ref. 133. 
Jackson First Market. Ref. 

133. 
Jade Beauty. 1935 intr. Rocky 

Ford Seed Breeders Assoc., 

Rocky Ford, Colo. 
Japan Coral Flesh. Refs. 23, 

45, 133. 



Japan Rock. 

Jasper. 

Jewel. Ref. 133. 

John Harvey. 

Johnson's Big Wonder. 

Klondike. Ref. 133. 

Krokee. Ref. 133. 

Large African. 

Large Cantaloupe. Ref. 38. 

Large Mexican. 

Large Musk. Ref. 138. 

Large Netted. Ref. 133. 

Large Yellow. 

Magnificent. 

Maize Market Garden. Ref. 

108. 
Malta. 

Mammoth Prolific. Ref. 136. 
Mary. Ref. 29. 
Melbourne Market. 
Melobite. 
Memphis Market. 
Mexican Yellow Netted. 
Minorca. Refs. 30, 38, 67. 
Moscatello. Ref. 108. 
Mountain Top. 
Nectar of Angels. Refs. 53, 99, 

100. 
Netted. Refs. 139, 145. 
New Gold. 

New Green Fleshed. Ref. 53. 
New Hybrid. Refs. 98, 99, 100. 
New Rival. 

New South. Refs. 40, 97. 
New Surprise Gem. 
New Victory. 
North Dakota. 
Northern Giant. Ref. 133. 
Onondaga. Ref. 133. 
Our Own. Ref. 133. 
Outremont Beauty. 
Parker's Extra Early. 
Parks Delight. 
Perfect Beauty. 
Perfect Gem. Ref. 133. 



48. 



Refs. 29, 44, 



Refs. 33, 



Refs. 98, 99, 100. 
Ref. 108. 
Refs. 35, 48. 



Portales Gem. 
Prize. Ref. 133. 
Prospero. 
Quality King. 
Queen. Refs. 29, 
Rajah. Ref. 133. 
Romana. 
Round Yellow. 

133. 
Runyon. Ref. 101. 
Salmon and Green. 

38, 53, 133. 
Salmon King. 
Satisfaction. 
Siam Netted. 
Sibley's Best. 
Skinner's Netted. 
Small Yellow. 
Smith's Earliest. 
Solomon Giant. 
South Jersey. Refs. 53, 133. 
Star. 
Strawberry. Refs. 29, 100, 133, 

136. 
Superb. Refs. 9, 29, 53, 133. 
Sydney Market. 
Syracuse. Ref. 133. 
Table Queen. 
Texas Belle. Ref. 133. 
The Nugget. Ref. 95. 
Ticonderoga. 

Toledo Early Market. Ref. 133. 
Tom Thumb. 
Triangle. Ref. 125. 
Twenty-day. 
Ulter. 
Vadco. 
Valpariso. 
Vasburgh. 
Waldorf. Ref. 133. 
Wayside Market. 
Wilson's Black. 
Woods Nectar. Ref. 90. 
Wood worth. 
Yamhill Giant. 



REFERENCES FOR MUSKMELONS 



8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 

15. 
16. 
17. 

18. 
19. 
20. 

21. 
22. 

23. 

21. 



Amer. Agric. 22:305. 1863. 

Amer. Agric. 28:164. 1869. 

Amer. Gard. 11:407-410. 1890. 

Amer'. Gard. 14:199-210. 1893. 

Amer. Gard. 18:733. 1897. 

Amer. Gard. 19:271. 1898. 

Amer. Gard. 21:103-104. 1903. 

Amer. Hort. Ann. 130-131. 1870. 

Ann. of Hort. 193. 1891. 

Ann. of Hort. 182. 1892. 

Ann. of Hort. 132. 1893. 

Bailey, L. H. Garden and Forest 6:412-413. 1893. 

Bailey, L. H. N. Y. Cornell Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 95:228- 

292. 1895. 
Bailey, L. H. Standard Cyclopedia of Horticulture 2:2027- 

2031. 1922. 
Beattie, W. R. U. S. D. A. Farmers Bui. 1468:1926. 
Blinn, P. K. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 85. 1903. 
Blinn. P. K. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 104. 1905. 
Blinn, P. K. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 108. 1906. 
Blinn, P. K. Colo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 126. 1908. 
Bridgeman, Thomas. The Young Gardener's Assistant. 

C. M. Saxton & Co., N. Y. 1857. 
Bui. of Applied Bot. 23 3 : 227-228. 1929-30. 
Burnette, F. H, Watson, G. and Stubbs, W. C. La. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 27 2nd ser. ' : 891-894. 1893. 
Burpee, W. Atlee. How to Grow Melons for Market. 1897. 

W. A. Burpee, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Burr, Fearing. Jr. Field and Garden Vegetables. Crosby & 

Nichols, Boston, Mass. 183-192. 1863. 



23. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

37. 
38. 

39. 

40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 



Cassidy, J. Col. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1888:142-144. 
Cent. Exp. Farm Rpt. Div. of Hort. 1901. 124-125. 
Cent. Exp. Farm Rpt. Div. of Hort. 1926. 48-49. 
Country Gentleman 51:712. 1886. 
Craig, J. N. Y. [Cornell l Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 200:159-176. 

1902. 
Cultivator 5 New Ser.) : 150. 1848. 
Cultivator 6 3rd Ser. :48. 1858. 
Cultivator 8 3rd Ser. : 28. 1860. 

Curtis, C. L. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 32:19-20. 1891. 
Curtis, C. L. Ky. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 38:33-34. 1892. 
Devol, W. S. Nev. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1890:16-17. 
Edmond, J. B., Strand, A. B., McNall, F. J. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Spc. Bui. 193. 1930. 
Enzie. W. D. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Cir. 151. 1934. 
Fessenden, T. G. New American Gardener. Otis, Broaders 

& Co., Boston. 1842. 
Flagg, C. A. and Towar, J. D. R. I. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1892. 143-144. 
Fulton, S. H. Ga. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 57. 1902. 
Garcia, F. N. M. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 63:34. 1907. 
Gard. Chron. 737. 1841. 
Goff, E. S. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 



Goff, E. S. 
Goff, E. S. 
Goff, E. S. 
Goff, E. S. 
Goff, E. S. 
Green, S. B. 
250. 



1882. 


126-128. 


1884. 


202-203. 


1885. 


121- 123. 


1886. 


237-239. 


1887. 


321-322. 


1888. 


123-127. 



Minn. Agr. Exp. Sta Rpt. 1887-1888. 249- 



92 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



50. Green, S. B. Vegetable Gardening. Webb Publ. Co., 

St. Paul, Minn. 1918. 

51. Griffin, H. H. and Watrous, F. L. Col. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Rpt. 1889. 101, 121. 

52. Griffin, H. H. and Watrous, F. L. Col. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 

1890. 192-211. 

53. Hansen, N. A. and Thornber, W. S. S. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. 

Bui. 67:55-102. 1900. 
51. Hawthorn, L. R. Tex. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 508:66-74. 1935. 
."»".. Henderson, Peter. Gardening for Profit. Orange Judd, 

New York. 1867. 

56. Horticulturist 7:484. 1852. 

57. Horticulturist 20:291-293. 1865. 

58. Jones, H. A., and Rosa. J. T. Truck Crop Plants. McGraw- 

Hill, New York. 1928. 

59. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 25:118-127. 1900. 

60. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 33:281-284. 1908. 

61. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 38:561-564. 1913. 

62. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 40:554-562. 1915. 

63. Lee, J. H. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 16 ;,2nd Ser.l: 462-470. 

1892. 

64. Lloyd, J. W. Muskmelon Production. Orange Judd, New 

York. 1928. 

65. Lloyd, J. W. ///. Agr. Exp. Sta. Cir. 405:8-15. 1933. 

66. Mag. of Hort. 30:143-144. 1864. 

67. Mag. of Hort. 33:80. 1867. 

68. Mahoney. Mich. Quart. Bui. 14(2):81-84. 1931. 

69. Market Growers Jour. 2:11. 1908. 

70. Market Growers Jour. 2:15. 1908. 

71. Market Growers Jour. 3:6-7. 1908. 

72. Market Growers Jour. 7:540. 1910. 

73. Market Growers Jour. 14:379-382. 1914. 
71. Market Growers Jour. 16:254-261. 1915. 

75. Market Growers Jour. 32:198-199. 1922. 

76. Market Growers Jour. 34:376-377. 1924. 

77. Market Growers Jour. 35:108-110. 1924. 

78. Market Growers Jour. 44:414-418. 1929. 

79. Market Growers Jour. 46:426. 1930. 

80. Market Growers Jour. 50:214. 1932. 

81. Market Growers Jour. 54:130-131. 1934. 

82. Market Growers Jour. 55:343. 1934. 

83. Massey, W. F. N. C. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 92:52. 1893. 

84. Massey, W. F. N. C. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 94:6-7. 1894. 

85. Massey, W. F. N. C. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1902:18. 

86 Mawe, Thomas and Abercrombie, John. Dictionary of 
Gardening & Botany. London. 1778. 

87. M'Mahon, Bernard. American Gardeners Calender. B. 

Graves. Philadelphia, Pa. 1806. 

88. Morgan, H. A. and Burnette, F. H. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

22:701. 1893. 

89. Newman, C. L. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1893. 67. 

90. Newman, J. S. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 2 (New Ser.):9. 

1888. 

91. Newman, J. S. and Clayton, J. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

20 New Ser.):7-8. 1890. 

92. Newman. J. S. and Clayton, J. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 

28 i New Ser. 1:8-11. 1891. 

93. Newman, W. H. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Canebrake Bui. 2 :3^t. 

1888. 
91. Newman, W. N. Ala. Agr. Exp. Sta. Canebrake Bui. 6:12- 
13. 1889. 

95. Poggendorff, W. Agr. Gazette of N. S. W. 40:873. 1929. 

96. Price, R. H, Harrington, H. H. and Ness, H. Tex. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 36:634-637. 1895. 



97. 

98. 

99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 

106. 
107. 
108. 

109. 
110. 

111. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 

124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 

128. 

129. 

130. 
131. 
132. 
133. 
134. 
133. 
136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 
141. 
112. 
143. 

144. 
145. 

146. 



Rural N. Y. 44:755. 
Rural N. Y. 54:164. 
Rural N. Y. 54:241. 
Rural N. Y. 55:70. 
Rural N. Y. 58:626. 
Rural N. Y. 58:770. 
Rural N. Y. 59:382. 
Rural N. Y. 59:479. 
Rural N. Y. 64:810. 
Rural N. Y. 70:279. 
Rural N. Y. 94:419. 



Quaintance, A. L. Ga. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 1900. 334-345. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 52:49-70. 1898. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 70: 17-44. 1900. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bui. 2:1901. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 96:125-133. 1902. 
Rane, F. W. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 99:25^13. 1903. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3:7-8. 1890. 
Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3:7. 1890. 
Robinson, L. R. The Cucurbits, Booklet. J. C. Robinson 

Co., Waterloo, Neb. 
Robinson, J. S. Md. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 25:51-53. 1894. 
Robinson, J. S. Md. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 33:125. 1895. 
Robinson, W. The Vegetable Garden, John Murray, London, 

411-432. 1920. New Edition. 1937. 
Rosa, J. T. American Fruit Grower 52:12-13. 1932. 
Rosa, J. T., Garthwaite, E. L. Calif. Agr. Exp. Sta. Circ. 
308. 1926. 

1885. 
1895. 
1895. 
1896. 
1899. 
1899. 
1900. 
1900. 
1905. 
1911. 
1935. 

Schneck, H. W. Market Growers Jour. 30(7):6-7. 1922. 
Schneck, H. W. N. Y. {Cornell) Agr. Ext. Bui. 176:52-55. 

1928. 
Smith, J. G. Neb. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 12:35. 1889. 
Speth, G. Ga. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 14:87-88. 1891. 
Stuart, Wm. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 169. 1912. 
Stubbs, W. C, Burnette, F. H. and Watson. E. La. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 36 2d Ser. 1 : 1252-1255. 1894. 
Stubbs, W. C. Burnette, F. H. and Watson, E. La. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 42 (2nd Ser. 1: 1526-1527. 1895. 
Thompson, H. C. Vegetable Crops. McGraw-Hill Book 

Co., New York. 1931. 
Tiitons Jour, of Hort. 3:234-237. 1868. 
Tilton's Jour, of Hort. 7:71-72. 1870. 
Tiitons Jour, of Hort. 9:315. 1871. 
Tracy, W. W. U. S. D. A. Bui. 21:226-241. 1903. 
Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 1877. 20. 
Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 1886. 112. 
Troop, James. Melon Culture. Orange Judd, New York. 

1922. 
Troop, J. and Woodbury, C. G. (Purdue) Ind. Agr. Exp. 

Sta. Bui. 135:1909. 
U. S. D. A. Ann. Rpt. 1854. 362. 
Vilmorin-Andrieux. Les Plantes Potageres. Paris, France. 

1883. 
Walker, E. Ark. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 69:63-84. 1901. 
Waid, C. W. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Spec. Bui. 95. 1919. 
Watts. R. L. Tenn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 5(1): 17-19. 1892. 
Watts, R. L. Vegetable Gardening. Orange Judd, New York. 

1933. 
Waugh, F. A. Okla. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 9:9-16. 1893. 
White, W. N. Gardening for the South. Orange Judd, 

New York. 1868. 
Wickson, E. J. California Vegetables in Garden and Field. 
Pacific Rural Press. San Francisco, Calif. 1897. 



CHAPTER V 



CUCUMBERS 



The existence of the cucumber in the New World 
can be traced to the time of Columbus according to 
Washington Irving who in his " Life of Columbus " states 
that he was known to have grown the crop in 1494 
on the island of Haiti. This vegetable was later reported 
by Cartier in 1535 in the vicinity of the present city of 
Montreal, by the early colonists of Virginia in 1609; and 
cucumbers are said to be one of the crops destroyed by 
General Sullivan in 1779 on his raid of destruction through 
western New York. In 1806 McMahon included a list 
of 8 cucumber varieties in his Gardeners' Catalogue, 
viz.. Early Short Prickley, Long Green Prickley, 
White Prickley. Long Green Turkey, Long White Turkey, 
Smyrna, Roman and White Spined. Practically all of 
these are mentioned in European literature prior to this 
time, thus suggesting their old world origin. 

Most modern varieties have gradually evolved from 
the European sorts, either as selections from direct 
importations or as the result of planned or natural 
hybridization. Up to 1872 when Tailby's Hybrid was 
first exhibited, there had been little or no active interest 
shown towards new sorts. Cucumbers previously listed 
were for the most part European importations though 
occasionally improved selections of White Spined and 
London Long Green were brought to the attention 
of the growers. From 1880 to the present there has 
been considerable increase in the number of cucumber 
varieties. Prior to 1900 such well-known sorts as 
Arlington White Spine, Everbearing, Cool and Crisp, 
Evergreen White Spine, Henderson's Perfected, Chicago 
Pickling and Boston Pickling were developed. The 
first 10 years of the 20th century saw the introduc- 
tion of some of our favorite varieties, upon which the 
modern development of superior varieties is based. In 
this period Davis Perfect, Early Fortune, Emerald, 
Klondike and Snow's Pickling were introduced. During 
the next two decades no less than 22 new sorts were 
originated including such new varieties as A and C, 
Adams, Barteldes, Double Yield Pickling, Longfellow, 
National Pickling and President. The Colorado, intro- 
duced in 1934 and Straight-8 listed in 1935 represent 
two very excellent sorts that have little in common with 
the cucumbers grown during the time of our early 
colonization. 

From the commercial point of view the American 
varieties of cucumbers are composed of three classes, 
based on their use. First, the field grown slicing or 
table sorts, characterized by the presence, with few 
exceptions, of white spines, grow to fairly large size, are 
usually attractive, and retain their green color over a 
comparatively long period of time. Second, the pickling 
varieties, also field grown, are almost invariably black- 
spined and are further characterized by being much 
smaller than the slicing varieties, much less tapered at the 



tip in immature stages, decidedly more productive, and 
somewhat less retentive of their green color, and do not 
shrivel during the pickling process. Third, the forcing 
or greenhouse varieties are obviously those adapted to 
culture under artificial heat. 

DISCUSSION OF CLASSIFICATIONS 

Very little has been attempted in classification of 
cucumber varieties. Although an ancient crop and one 
which has been given considerable attention by horti- 
cultural writers, its treatment has been almost with- 
out exception confined to the listing of names or a very 
brief discussion of varieties. Miller (47) in 1768 men- 
tioned several sorts, namely the Common, Long Turkey 
and Long White Prickley and Mawe and Abercrombie 
(46) listed 8 sorts in 1778; later McMahon (38) in 
1806 and Lindley i37) in 1831 included short discus- 
sions of varieties. Naudin (51) divided the crop into 
4 groups, the small Russians, the ordinary Long Greens, 
the White cucumbers and the cucumbers of Sikkim. 
Other than a brief description of each type no further 
division was made. Fearing Burr, Jr. (9) wrote the 
first comprehensive account of American vegetable 
varieties in 1863 and, although 55 varieties were dis- 
cussed, nearly two-thirds belonged to the English forcing 
group. Vilmorin-Andrieux (78) the French seedsmen 
published the first edition of " Les Plantes Potageres " 
in 1856. This work is analagous to Burr's treatise on 
vegetable varieties and has gone through several editions. 
Some 30 varieties of cucumbers are discussed in the 
edition of 1883. No division is made of the Continental 
types, but under the discussion of Long Green English, 
9 or 10 sorts are grouped as most adaptable to forcing. 
An additional group, ridge cucumbers, those which do 
fairly well out of doors but better under glass, completes 
their classification. 

In 1887 the first attempt was made to classify cucum- 
ber varieties on the basis of morphological characters. 
After several years trials at this Experiment Station, 
Goff (19) published an account of 24 varieties, all of 
which were divided into one of two groups based on 
color of the fruits when immature, viz., young fruit 
green and young fruit white or greenish white. 

Waugh and Thompson in an article in Bailey's 
Cyclopedia of Horticulture, 1914, (6) divided all 
cucumbers into four general groups, viz., the common 
cucumber, the Sikkim, the Snake and the West India 
Gherkin. The first group was further divided into the 
English forcing type and the field sorts, and the latter 
again classified as to whether the varieties were black- 
spined or white-spined. Four black-spined variety 
groups and two white-spined groups were established. 

A group classification made by Sturtevant (24 1, but 
not published until 1919 included 6 divisions based on 



93 



94 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



varietal types. These were Early Cluster, Early Frame, 
Long Green, Long Green English, White Dutch and 
Early Russian. 

The cucumber does not lend itself readily to detailed 
classification and for obvious reasons no attempt is 
made in this study to do other than to arrange the 
varieties alphabetically. 

A and C. Syn. Ace. 

This variety originated with Abbott & Cobb, 
Philadelphia, Pa., and was introduced by them in 1928. 
In their catalog for 1935 the originators say, " This is 
positively a new stock of cucumber which we are offering 
and not a renamed variety nor an old variety remodeled." 
The fruits of this new sort are unusually attractive, 
uniformly straight and hold the dark color for a long 
time. They are somewhat like Davis Perfect in general 
appearance, being about the same length but slightly 
thicker at the medial, more abruptly tapered towards 
the apex and more circular in cross-section. 

Fruit moderately long and medium plump, 9-10 x 2 , ) -2 1 _. 
inches. Shape somewhat fusiform, straight, medial slightly swollen; 
base gradually tapered; apex abruptly tapered. Cross-section near 
base circular, at medial and near apex slightly triangular. Color 
dark green, with rather obscure narrow stripes extending not more 
than one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles few and indis- 
tinct. Spines white. Flesh moderately thick and greenish white 
in color. Seed mass moderately small and solid. 

Abundance. Ref. 42. 

The variety Abundance was originated by a gardener 
near Rochester, New York, and was introduced about 
1916. It is primarily a forcing sort, with long, smooth, 
symmetrical fruits that are quite distinct in the profuse 
marking of fine yellowish green specks over most of the 
surface. The fruits are equal in size to those of Davis 
Perfect, although somewhat shorter than the forcing 
strain of that variety. They are less tapering at the 
ends, lighter green in general color and have less promi- 
nent tubercles. 

Fruit moderately long and moderately slender, 9-10 x 2-2 ^ 
inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, straight, symmetrical; base 
rounded; apex rounded but occasionally abruptly tapered; ridges 
obscure. Cross-section near base and medial circular; near apex 
very slightly triangular. Color dark green, profusely and finely 
speckled with pale yellowish green specks over most of the surface, 
particularly at the apex and medial; prominently marked with 
narrow, pale greenish yellow stripes at the apex which extend about 
one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles few and obscure, 
spines white. Flesh thick and greenish white in color. Seed 
mass small and solid. 

Adams. 

In 1926 the T. Lee Adams Company of Kansas City, 
Missouri, introduced the Adams cucumber as a cross 
between Telegraph and Davis Perfect. The variety 
has not been widely cataloged, at least under the 
name Adams, but it is, however, considered to be an 
outstanding sort. The fruits are most like those of 
Longfellow in general appearance, although the Adams is 
2-3 inches shorter, more uniformly rounded at the ends, 
more bluish green in color and has larger and more 
prominent tubercles. 



Fruit moderately long and medium plump, 9-10 x 2 1 4-2 1 > 
inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, straight, occasionally somewhat 
curved; medial even; base and apex rounded. Cross-section at 
base and apex circular, at medial slightly triangular. Color at the 
early stages very dark bluish green, later deep, dull green; tip 
stripes very narrow and inconspicuous, extending less than one- 
quarter length of fruit. Tubercles many, rather large and promi- 
nent. Spines white. Flesh very thick and firm, distinctly white 
in color. Seed mass very small and solid. 

Arlington White Spine. Refs. 3, 12, 13, 14, 16, 20, 

21, 22, 34, 35, 39, 48, 49, 56, 57, 58, 61, 64, 75, 79. 
Syns. Ak-sar-ben, Aldon White Spine, Arlington, 
Arlington Early White Spine, Arlington Famous 
White Spine, Arlington Improved, Baltimore 
White Spine, Bloomsdale Perfected White Spine, 
Blue Ribbon Improved White Spine, California 
Gem, Climax, Crystal Springs, Early Perfection 
White Spine, Early Prolific White Spine, Early 
Spine, Extra Early Arlington White Spine, Extra 
Early White Spine, Extra Select White Spine, 
Famous, Famous White Spine, Ideal White Spine, 
Improved Arlington, Improved Arlington White 
Spine, Improved Baltimore White Spine, 
Improved Early White Spine, Improved Extra 
Early Arlington White Spine, Improved Extra 
Early White Spine, Improved White Spine, New 
Arlington White Spine, Ohio White Spine, Per- 
fected Arlington, Washington White Spine. 
The name Arlington was first used about 1886 for a 
special selection of the White Spine cucumber. W. W. 
Rawson, one of the pioneer market gardeners of the 
country, was located at Arlington, Massachusetts, and 
the forcing of cucumbers in hot beds and cold frames 
was one of his most successful enterprises. For some 
years he grew a selection known as Improved White 
Spine or Rawsons Improved. D. M. Ferry & Co. of 
Detroit and James J. H. Gregory first called this variety 
Arlington, although later it became better known as 
Arlington White Spine. 

For many years this was the most widely grown 
cucumber variety in and about Arlington. Many strains 
were developed and in due time largely replaced the 
original. Although the name is still listed today, the 
stock is inferior to many of the new and improved intro- 
ductions. The best strains are known as Arlington 
White Spine Forcing, Bennett's White Spine, Bollwinkle's 
North Carolina strain, Boston Forcing White Spine, 
Boston Market Forcing, Breck's White Spine, Dark 
Green Arlington (Bunting Strain', Early Florida and 
Florida. 

The fruits of Arlington are 4-5 inches shorter than 
those of Evergreen White Spine, somewhat less plump, 
and more strongly tapered towards the apex, whereas 
the skin of Evergreen White Spine is decidedly darker 
green in color and has much narrower and less promi- 
nent tip stripes. 

Fruit medium long and moderately plump, 7—7 ' 2 x 2 1 ; 2 4 
inches. Shape unevenly fusiform, straight and symmetrical, 
strongly tapered towards apex, abruptly tapered to nearly rounded 
at the base. Cross-section nearly circular at base, distinctly tri- 
angular at medial and near apex. Color medium to moderately 
light green, marked with broad, prominent tip stripes which extend 




r 







i Natural size; 



EARLY FORTUNE 



ARLINGTON WHITE SPINE 




EARLY CYCLONE (upper) 



(Natural sizs 



CUMBERLAND 



CUCUMBERS 



95 



for one-third or more the length of the fruit. Tubercles few, rather 
obscure. Spines white. Flesh medium thick to moderately thin, 
greenish white in color. Seed mass large and rather loose. 

Barteldes. Ref. 22. 

The Barteldes cucumber which was given an Award 
of Merit in the All America vegetable selections for 1934 
was introduced in 1925 by Barteldes Seed Co., Lawrence, 
Kansas. It was introduced as a very dark green shipping 
cucumber and in the middle western states is considered 
a superior variety. The fruits are much like those of 
Longfellow, but are slightly plumper, more uniformly 
rounded at the ends, slightly less warty and distinctly 
more speckled with yellowish green; and the flesh 
whiter. 

Fruit long and moderately plump, 10-12 x 2'2~3 inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical, straight, medial very slightly swollen, 
rounded at the base and apex. Surface very smooth even at the 
pickling stages. Cross-section circular in all parts. Color very 
dark green, speckled over the entire surface with pale yellowish 
green specks; tip stripes rather narrow and obscure, extending not 
more than one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles very few, 
practically absent. Spines white. Flesh thick and white in color. 
Seed mass small and solid. 

Boston Pickling. Refs. 3, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 

21, 29, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 64, 
65, 75, 79, 81, 82. Syns. Boston Pickle, Early 
Green Prolific, Extra Early Green Prolific, Extra 
Early Prolific, Extra Green Prolific Pickling, 
Extra Long Green Prolific, Green Prolific, Green 
Prolific Pickling, Improved Extra Early Green 
Prolific, Short Green Pickling, Short Pickling, 
Short Prolific, Short Prolific Pickle, Short Pro- 
lific Pickling. 

The name Boston Pickling seems to have been first 
used about 1880. In the 1885 catalog of W. W. Rawson 
& Co. of Boston, the variety is listed as Boston Pick- 
ling (True Lincoln stock) (American Gherkin). The 
origin is unknown. Present day stocks are considered 
to be darker green than most pickling sorts, are more 
slender and lack the thickened base or shoulder present 
in Chicago Pickling. 

Fruit moderately short and medium plump, 6-7 x 2 1 _i— 2 ' i 
inches. Shape long oval, nearly cylindrical, straight, medial 
slightly swollen, base and apex rounded. Cross-section circular near 
base, triangular at medial and apex. Color moderately dark green, 
tinted lighter at extreme apex: tip stripes rather prominent, extend 
one-half the length of fruit. Tubercles moderately many but not 
very prominent. Spines black. Flesh moderately thin and very 
white in color. Seed mass moderately large, and has small tri- 
angular cavity. 

Pickles unevenly fusiform, with taper towards apex much 
longer than that towards base; moderately dark green in color, 
slightly lighter at extreme apex. 

< lapitol. 

Luther Burbank crossed the Lemon cucumber with 
Burpee's Long Snow-White and secured a new form which 
he listed as Iceland in 1917. In his catalog for 1923, 
another selection, Capitol, " with fruits exactly like Ice- 
land in every respect except color which is bright green " 



was introduced. This was apparently a segregate of the 
second generation from the same cross. Stocks grown 
at Geneva have shown this variety to be much like 
Lemon in size and form, but green in skin color. Appar- 
ently little publicity was given this sort, for it is not 
listed in other seedsmen's catalogs. 

Chicago Pickling. Refs. 3, 6, 13, 20, 21, 22, 29, 48, 

49, 57, 61, 63, 64, 66, 75, 79. Syns. Improved 
Chicago Pickle, Westerfield, Westerfield Chicago 
Pickling, Westerfield Pickling. 
This variety was first listed in 1888 by D. M. 
Ferry 8b Co. of Detroit, Michigan. It was probably 
developed in the vicinity of Chicago as it has been a 
favorite in that section for many years. Vaughan Seed 
Store of Chicago in 1897 introduced a very excellent 
strain which they named the Westerfield Chicago Pickle 
for a gardener who made special selections for the pickle 
trade. This is one of the four leading sorts grown in 
most of the pickle growing regions. The fruits are some- 
what lighter green than Boston Pickling and have a 
more prominent and distinctly rounded base or shoulder. 
It is especially well adapted for use as dill pickles. 

Fruit short and moderately slender, 5-6 x 2-2)4 inches. 
Shape unevenly fusiform, abruptly tapered at base, gradually 
tapered towards apex, slightly swollen near medial. Cross-section 
circular at base, distinctly triangular at medial and apex. Color 
medium green, tinted with yellow at the apex and rather promi- 
nently striped for one-half the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
moderately prominent. Spines black. Flesh moderately thin, 
greenish white in color. Seed mass moderately large and solid. 

Pickles distinctly tapered from base to apex; base large, 
rounded. Color moderately dark green, considerably lighter at 
medial and apex. 

China Long. Refs. 3, 4, 6, 16, 17, 19, 22, 57, 58, 64, 
75, 79. Syns. Chicago Giant, China, Chinese, 
Chinese Evergreen, Chinese Long Green, Early 
Chinese, Great Giant, Jumbo, Long China, Long 
Green China, Long Green Chinese, Shumway's 
Giant, Very Long Green Chinese. 

The names given above and those listed under the 
variety name Chinese Three Feet represent a form which 
differs noticeably in both fruit and foliage from the 
so-called American cucumbers. As early as 1862 in the 
catalog of James Vick's Seeds, Rochester, New York, we 
find the variety name Chinese Long Green, and over 
thirty -two years later the name Chinese Long Remaining 
Green was noted in the catalog of Henry Dreer of Phila- 
delphia. The type was listed as " China " in 1921 by 
Harris, and later by Burrell, Henderson, Burgess and 
others. Inasmuch as the variety has not been con- 
sidered as a standard commercial sort, but more as a 
novelty, there has been some mixture of stocks. The 
descriptions given below and under Chinese Three Feet 
represent two distinct types. The variety names associ- 
ated with them have not always been consistent, and 
further trial will be necessary to establish more exactly 
the synonomy of the two varieties. The fruits of this 
type are considerably shorter than Chinese Three Feet, 
distinctly more angular in cross-section, darker green in 
skin color and distinctly more warted. 



96 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Plant very vigorous and coarse, spread 5-6 feet or more, leaves 
very large, 9-10 x 9-10 inches, very dark green, profusely wrinkled 
and crumpled with distinct serrate margins; tendrils very long and 
well developed. 

Fruit very long and moderately plump, 12-14 x 2 1 ?-2 3 4 inches; 
symmetrical, straight, rounded at the base and apex and rather 
prominently ridged. Cross-section distinctly triangular or occa- 
sionally nearly quadrangular. Color medium to dark green, finely 
speckled with pale yellow over the entire surface, particularly along 
the depressions; tip stripes narrow, not very prominent and extend- 
ing about one-third the length of fruit. Tubercles very promi- 
nent, large, almost wart-like. Spines long and white. Flesh 
moderately thick, decidedly greenish white in color. Seed mass 
medium large with triangular cavity in center. 

Chinese Three Feet. Refs. 20, 75. Syns. Chinese 
Long-Remaining Green, Chinese Snake, Climb- 
ing, Climbing China, Japan Dark Green Cue, 
Japanese Dark Green. 
The catalog of Dupuy and Ferguson of Montreal, 
Canada, for the year 1933 lists the variety Chinese 
Three Feet and also Chinese Long Green. As previously 
noted under the variety China Long, there are several 
names for these two varieties which have been used 
interchangeably and the description given below repre- 
sents the variety producing the longer and smoother 
fruits of the two. It is somewhat like the English Forc- 
ing cucumbers, although it is more prickly and somewhat 
darker and more glossy green in color. 

Fruit very long and slender, 18-24 x l 3 4 -2 inches. Shape 
cylindrical Iwhen grown on the ground, it usually coils somewhat); 
base tapered, usually constricted; apex sharply tapered to pointed; 
ridges obscure. Cross-section circular at base and medial, slightly 
triangular at apex. Color light green, profusely speckled with pale 
yellowish green over the entire surface except over the moderately 
dark green, narrow, irregular stripes along the medial; tip stripes 
obscure, one-eighth or less the length of the fruit. Tubercles few 
and obscure. Spines white. Flesh moderately thin, distinctly 
greenish white, often slightly bitter. Seed mass moderately large 
and solid, contains very few and small seeds. 

Clark's Special. Ref. 22. Syns. Imperator, Lago 
Nu-green. 

This introduction of the Associated Seed Growers, 
Inc., New Haven, Connecticut, received an award of 
Merit in the 1932 All-America trials. The variety has 
shown considerable promise as a shipping and market 
sort. In general appearance it is most like Davis 
Perfect, although the fruits are more plump, more 
abruptly tapered at the ends, and have fewer but some- 
what more prominent tubercles. 

Fruit moderately long and moderately plump, 9-10 x 2'2~3 
inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, slightly to abruptly tapered at 
the base, sides nearly parallel at the medial, and abruptly tapered 
to rounded at the apex. Cross-section, base circular, apex and 
medial moderately triangular. Color dark green tinted with pale 
yellow near the apex; tip stripes rather broad, often rather obscure, 
extending one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles moder- 
ately few, large and prominent. Spines white. Flesh thick and 
greenish white in color. Seed mass moderately small and solid. 

( '.olorado. 

This new and attractive variety originated with the 
J. C. Robinson Seed Co., Waterloo, Nebraska, was 
introduced in 1934 and received an award of merit in 
the 1935 All-America trials. It is similar in shape to the 
Vaughan but differs from that variety in being 3-5 inches 



shorter, more slender and somewhat less prominently 
warted. 

Fruit long and moderately slender, 9-12 x 2-2 '4 inches. 
Shape cylindrical, straight; base sharply tapered, apex rounded, 
medial even. Cross-section circular at all portions. Color dark 
green, with tip stripes narrow, greenish white in color and extending 
considerably less than one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
few, slightly prominent. Spines white. Flesh moderately thick 
and greenish white in color. Seed mass moderately small and 
solid. 

Common Rough Green Pickling. Ref. 46. 

This is one of the seven varieties mentioned by 
Mawe & Abercrombie in 1778. According to the descrip- 
tion then published it was a " Middle sized fruit about 
6 or 7 inches long, having a dark green, rough rind, 
closely set with very small prickles; the plant is of the 
hardiest sort, bears plentifully in summer, but does not 
show fruit early, so is not proper for frames." 

Cool and Crisp. Refs. 6, 12, 13, 57, 61, 64, 75. Syn. 
Crisp and Cool. 
Henderson's Cool and Crisp was introduced by 
Peter Henderson 8s Co. in 1893 and in most trial ground 
reports was described as a " strain of White Spine some- 
what like the Arlington but longer and more cylindrical." 
According to the introducer the variety was primarily a 
pickling sort but also most useful for slicing. The 
variety is in existence today and while not the most 
popular sort it is early, prolific and desirable. 

Fruit medium long and moderately slender, 7-8 x 2-2 '4 inches. 
Shape somewhat fusiform, long taper towards base, slightly swollen 
at the medial and slightly tapered toward apex. Cross-section 
slightly triangular at medial and apex, nearly circular at base. 
Color dark green, tinted yellowish green near apex; tip stripes rather 
prominent, extend one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
medium in number, large, prominent. Spines white. Flesh medium 
thick, greenish white in color. Seed mass medium large, solid. 

Crystal Apple. 

This cucumber was listed by Arthur Yates 8b Co. of 
Sydney, Australia, in 1933. Ferry Morse Seed Co. of 
Detroit listed it in 1934 and showed a very excellent 
illustration of the white apple-shaped fruits. For many 
years the Apple Shaped or Lemon cucumber has been 
very popular in Australia and as a prolific and sweet 
flavored sort has come forward both as a home garden 
and market cucumber. This new white variety is 
similar to the Lemon cucumber in shape and size but is 
distinctly lighter in color. 

Cumberland. Refs. 13, 57, 75. Syn. New Cumberland. 
The Cumberland, offered by Henry A. Dreer and 
W. Atlee Burpee of Philadelphia in 1902, was originated 
by Chauncey P. Coy 8b Sons, Nebraska, and was con- 
sidered by Mr. Coy to have been one of his best pro- 
ductions. The new variety resulted from a cross between 
Parisian Pickle and Peerless White Spine and was offered 
after eight years of careful selection work. The success- 
ful combination of these two quite different varieties 
made an ideal sort for table use and for pickling. When 
the fruits are small they are covered with fine hair-like 
spines in which respect they resemble Danish and 
Parisian Pickling. The variety is little used today. 




r 



(Natural size) 



CUMBERLAND 



IRISH QUEEN 




EARLY FRAME 



(Natural size) 

NOROTON SELECT WHITE SPINE 



CUCUMBERS 



97 



Fruit medium long and moderately slender, 7-8 x 2 - 2 ' t inches. 
Shape partially cylindrical, straight; base moderately tapered; 
medial slightly swollen: apex rounded; surface very rough and 
bumpy, uneven, finely ridged. Cross-section triangular at all 
portions. Color medium green, profusely speckled with yellowish 
green over most of the surface; tip stripes obscure and extend one- 
quarter or less the length of the fruit. Tubercles very many, small, 
pimple-like. Spines white, exceedingly numerous, hair-like. Flesh 
medium thick, decidedly greenish white in color. Seed mass mod- 
erately small, solid. 

Danish Pickling. Ref. 57. 

This is a comparatively new variety which was 
introduced in 1912 by L. Daehnfeldt of Odense, Den- 
mark, and first offered in this country in 1915 by Meyer - 
Stisser of Baltimore. The variety produces fruits which 
are extremely large and long and thickly covered with 
fine spines. The variety is early and prolific and 
produces fruits over a long season. It most resembles 
Cumberland especially in respect to the degree of spini- 
ness. However, it is decidedly longer and more slender 
than that variety. 

Fruit very long and moderately plump, 12-15 x 2 1 _>-3 inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical, usually straight, moderately symmetrical; 
base rounded, often slightly constricted; apex rounded; ridges 
obscure. Cross-section circular in all portions. Color dull, dark 
green, obscurely striped at the apex one-third the length of the 
fruit, often speckled with greenish yellow. Tubercles very num- 
erous, small, pimple-like, prominent. Spines white, very numerous, 
fine, hair-like. Flesh medium thick, very fine texture, white in 
color, rather tart. Seed mass small and solid, with few seeds formed. 

Pickles long and slender, cylindrical, rounded at the base, 
abruptly tapered at the apex; ridge obscure. Color very dark green, 
uniformly distributed. Tubercles very numerous. Flesh greenish 
white, firm. 

Davis Perfect. Refs. 6, 22, 29, 39, 40, 42, 43, 57, 59. 
Syns. Challenge, Davis Perfection, Davis Per- 
fect " Select," Perfected Davis Perfect, 20th 
Century, Vadco Wonder. 
When introduced in 1906 by Alfred J. Brown Seed 
Co., Grand Rapids, Michigan and Wm. Henry Maule 
of Philadelphia, the Davis Perfect cucumber was called 
the " most sensational vegetable novelty of the year." 
Eugene Davis of Grand Rapids who had originated the 
Davis Wax bean and Grand Rapids lettuce was also the 
originator of this new cucumber. For many years it 
was the most popular of the shipping varieties due to its 
deep green color and the long smooth fruits with pointed 
ends. Strains are available which are suitable for both 
outdoor and indoor culture. It is slightly longer than 
Early Fortune, more uniformly fusiform, more triangular 
in cross-section and has more prominent tubercles. 

Fruit moderately long and moderately slender, 9-10 x 2-2 Vi 
inches. Shape fusiform, symmetrical, straight; base and apex 
long tapering; medial swollen; ridges rather prominent; cross-section 
slightly triangular at base and medial, more distinct at apex. Color 
dark green, rather prominently marked with narrow stripes at the 
apex for one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles many, 
rather prominent. Spines white. Flesh moderately thick, greenish 
white in color. Seed mass small, solid. 

Deltus. Refs. 22, 29, 44, 45. 

The Deltus cucumber originated on the farm of 
Adelbert Titus of Irondequoit, a market garden center 
near Rochester, New York. It was developed in much 



the same way as the Davis Perfect and with the same 
object in view, namely the production and development 
of a cucumber perfect in appearance and suitable to 
greenhouse conditions. Hart & Vick, Inc., of Rochester, 
were the introducers in 1919. The fruits are somewhat 
slender and distinctly less tapering at the ends than 
are those of Davis Perfect, while the tubercles and tip 
stripes are much less prominent. 

Fruit moderately long and medium plump, 9-10 x 2'i 2 ' _. 
inches. Shape cylindrical, straight, slightly swollen at the medial; 
base rounded to slightly tapering, apex abruptly tapered, ridges 
obscure. Cross-section circular at base, nearly circular at medial 
and apex. Color dark green, obscurely marked with very narrow 
greenish yellow stripes at the apex which extend one-quarter or 
usually much less than the length of the fruit. Tubercles few and 
obscure. Spines white, few. Flesh thick, greenish white in color, 
very fine texture. Seed mass small and solid. 

Double Yield Pickle. Ref. 22. 

Joseph Harris Co., Coldwater, New York, intro- 
duced Double Yield Pickle in 1924. The variety was 
secured from a gardener who had been selecting and per- 
fecting his own strain for many years. In the words of 
the introducer, " The remarkable thing about this new 
cucumber is its wonderful productiveness. For every 
pickle that is cut off two or three more are produced." 
Double Yield is one of the earliest cucumbers with which 
we are acquainted. It is distinct as a pickling sort, 
being longer in proportion to its thickness than any but 
Jersey Pickling and is much more symmetrical, smoother 
and more uniformly and abruptly rounded at the ends 
than any other. It is, however, somewhat lighter in 
color, particularly at the medial and apex, than are the 
commonly used pickling varieties of today. 

Fruit short and slender, 5-6 x 1 " £-2 inches. Shape cylindrical, 
straight and symmetrical; base slightly tapering; slightly swollen 
near base, rounded at apex; ridges obscure. Cross-sections circular 
in all portions. Color medium green, tinted greenish white near 
apex; tip stripes narrow, rather prominent and extend one-quarter 
the length of the fruit. Tubercles practically absent. Spines black, 
very few. Flesh moderately thick, greenish white in color. Seed 
mass moderately small and solid. 

Pickle, long oval, very symmetrical, distinctly rounded at base 
and apex; ridge obscure. Cross-section very slightly triangular at 
medial and apex. Color medium green at the base and part of 
medial, remainder moderately light green. Tubercles few. 

Earliest of All. Refs. 22, 57, 75. Syns. Burrell's 
Earliest of All, Earliest White Spine, First Crop, 
First of All, Forty Day, Mill's Earliest. 
The name by which this variety is known is reason- 
ably correct in describing its seasonal maturity. It is 
one of the perfected White Spine selections and has been 
known for nearly forty years. S. M. Isbell & Co., 
Jackson, Michigan, and D. V. Burrell of Rocky Ford, 
Colorado, both were featuring it by 1906. The illustra- 
tion in the 1909 catalog of D. V. Burrell shows the 
fruits to be quite blocky in appearance and shorter than 
Arlington White Spine. At Geneva this variety was 
about as long as Early Frame and very much like it in 
shape, being somewhat less convex at the medial, and 
having fewer and less prominent tubercles and white 
instead of black spines. 



98 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Fruit moderately short and medium plump, 6'_>-7 x 2 , 4 -2 1 _i 
inches. Shape short oval, straight; base rounded, medial slightly 
swollen; apex rounded. Cross-section circular at the base, triangular 
at medial and near apex. Color moderately dark green, tinted with 
yellowish white at apex; tip stripes medium prominent and extend 
one-quarter to one-third the length of fruit. Tubercles few and 
obscure. Spines white. Flesh medium thick, crisp and greenish 
white in color. Seed mass medium large, with distinct cavity at 
center. 

Early Beauty. Refs. 41, 43, 52, 75. Syns. Early 
Express, Express Extra Early, Tempey's Express 
Pickler. 

This was first offered by John Lewis Childs, Floral 
Park, New York, in 1899 as a sport from Siberian. In 
1902 the Iowa Seed Co. introduced Early Express which 
had originated with C. P. Coy. The two varieties seem 
to have been quite similar if the descriptions in the 
catalogs are correct. (Some years later De Giorgi of 
Council Bluffs, Iowa, offered a new sort which he called 
Early Express, but which apparently differed from the 
earlier variety of the same name.) 

Early Beauty was about the same size as Early 
Frame, somewhat less triangular in cross-section, lighter 
green in color, and was white-spined instead of black. 

Fruit moderately short and moderately slender, 6-7 x 2-2 '4 
inches. Shape oval, straight, symmetrical; base and apex rounded, 
medial even to very slightly swollen. Cross-section circular at 
base, and slightly triangular at medial and apex. Color medium 
bright green, gradually blending into nearly white at apex; tip 
stripes moderately broad and prominent, extending one-third to one- 
half the length of the fruit. Spines white. 

Early Cluster. Refs. 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 18, 19, 21, 25, 

46, 48, 49, 50, 53, 56, 57, 58, 62, 65, 72, 75, 79, 

80, 82. Syns. Cluster, Early Cluster Prickley, 

Early Green Cluster, Green Cluster, Improved 

Early Green Cluster, Table Queen. 

This type is one of the oldest of all cultivated 

cucumbers. It is mentioned in all of the old lists, that of 

Mawe and Abercrombie in 1778: McMahon, 1806; Fes- 

senden, 1828; Bridgemen, 1857; and Burr in 1863. The 

latter in describing it says, " A very popular early 

cucumber producing fruit in clusters near the root of the 

plant." Goff (19) writing in 1887 says " In the true 

Early Cluster, the fruits are literally produced in clusters, 

three or more appearing at the same node; but judging 

from the samples tested, this quality seems to have been 

largely lost." The name Early Green Cluster seems to 

have been used at first but Early Cluster has been the 

accepted name during the last century. 

Fruit short and medium plump, 5-6 x 2 1 4 -2 1 £ inches. Shape 
oblong angular, straight; base rounded and full; medial slightly 
swollen; apex rounded. Cross-section slightly triangular at base 
and distinctly triangular at medial and apex; color rather light 
green, tinted with pale yellowish white at apex; tip stripes narrow, 
rather prominent, greenish yellow in color and extend one-quarter to 
one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles many, moderately 
prominent. Spines black. Flesh thin, rather tough, white with 
very slight tinge of green. Seed mass very large and solid. 

Pickles rounded at the base, even at medial and slightly taper- 
ing at the apex; cross-section distinctly triangular; color rather 
light green, distinctly light at apex. 



Early Cyclone. Refs. 57, 75. Syns. Cyclone, White 
Cluster. 

Early Cyclone originated with Chauncey P. Coy of 
Waterloo, Nebraska, and was introduced in 1900 by 
Johnson & Stokes of Philadelphia. The name Cyclone 
was used to indicate the rapid growing tendency of the 
variety and in this respect it resembled Earliest of All. 
The fruits were about as long as those of Early Russian, 
but differed from that variety in being slightly more 
plump, smoother, white spined, and in having whiter 
flesh and a less solid seed mass. 

Fruit very short and medium plump, 3 J 2-4 x 2 1 4-2 1 2 inches. 
Shape short oval, straight; slightly larger at rounded base, even at 
medial, and very slightly tapering to a rounded apex. Cross-section 
circular at base, slightly triangular at medial and apex. Color 
medium green, tinted greenish white at apex and rather prominently 
marked with narrow, greenish white tip stripes which extend one- 
third or more the length of the fruit; as fruit approaches maturity it 
becomes nearly white. Tubercles few, small, not very prominent. 
Spines white. Flesh moderately thin, white in color. Seed mass 
large, with triangular cavity present at center. 

Early Fortune. Refs. 22, 57. Syn. Special Dark Green. 

The name Early Fortune was first used sometime 
previous to 1906 by J. Bolgiano & Son of Baltimore. 
The name was applied to a selection described as " the 
earliest and best White Spine Cucumber ever offered." 
Another strain which also received the name Early 
Fortune was selected by George Starr at Royal Oak, 
Michigan, in 1906 from a single plant found in a crop of 
Davis Perfect. This became the parent stock for the 
Early Fortune introduced by Jerome B. Rice Seed Co., 
Cambridge, New York, about 1910, and has continued to 
represent the type as known today. 

The fruits of Early Fortune are slightly shorter than 
those of Davis Perfect, much more abruptly tapered to 
rounded at the base, more circular in cross-section and 
have less prominent tubercles. 

Fruits medium long and moderately slender, 8-9 x 2-2 ] 4 inches. 
Shape unevenly fusiform, very slightly tapering to rounded at the 
base; medial slightly swollen; apex long tapered. Cross-section 
circular at base and medial, slightly triangular at apex. Color 
dark green, rather prominently marked with narrow greenish yellow 
stripes at the apex, which extend one-quarter to one-third the 
length of the fruit. Tubercles moderately many, rather obscure. 
Spines white. Flesh medium thick, crisp and nearly white in color. 
Seed mass medium large and solid. 

Early Frame. Refs. 3, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19, 21, 

25, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 70, 72, 75, 79, 80. Syns. 

Early Frame Short Green, Early Prolific Short 

Green, Early Short Green, Early Short Prolific, 

Extra Early Frame, Short Green. 
As one of the earliest maturing sorts this variety has 
been grown in American gardens at least since 1806 at 
which time McMahon included it in his Gardeners' 
Catalog. About the middle of the 19th century the 
name Short Green became associated with the type, and, 
although at the time was considered distinct by some, the 
two were soon cataloged as synonymous. Short Green 
Prickley may have been the prototype from which Early 
Frame or Short Green evolved. The fruits of Short 




EXTRA LONG WHITE SPINE (upper; 



WINDSOR PICKLING 



(Natural size, 




CAPITAL 



CUCUMBERS 



99 



Green Prickley were, however, consistently shorter and 
distinctly smoother skinned. Present day stocks of 
Early Frame are similar to Early Cluster. The fruits 
are 1-2 inches shorter, more tri-angular in cross-section 
and considerably darker green in color. 

Fruit moderately short and medium plump, 6-7 x 2 ' t — 2 ' _• 
inches. Shape short oval, straight; base rounded, slightly smaller 
at medial, tapering to a rounded apex; depressions maiked. Cross- 
section moderately circular at base, triangular at medial and apex. 
Color moderately dark green, tinted greenish white at apex; tip 
stripes prominent, extending one-third to one-half the length of the 
fruit. Tubercles moderately few, prominent. Spines black. Flesh 
medium thick, greenish white in color. Seed mass medium large 
with small triangular cavity at center. Mature fruits deep russet 
and often slightly netted. 

Early Russian. Refs. 3, 8, 9, 12, 16, 18, 19, 21, 53, 56, 

57, 58, 62, 64, 72, 73, 75, 82. Syns. Borowskian, 

Early Russian Gherkin, Extra Early Russian, 

Improved Early Russian, Muromian, Muromian 

Gherkin, Russian, Russian Gherkin, Russian 

Shortish Green, Russian Small Early Pickling, 

Small Early Russian. 

The United States Patent Office Report for 1854 

states that Early Russian was " recently introduced 

from Europe." This agrees with lists which were in 

use at that time (Hovey & Co., 1859) and also with Burr 

who in 1863 wrote: This comparatively new variety 

resembles, in some respects, the Early Cluster. J. C. 

Robinson Co. say, " Early Russian is the smallest 

cucumber we grow, extremely early and amazingly 

productive. It is of little use except for small uniform 

pickles, but in districts where the late maturing kinds 

will not ripen this cucumber is popular." 

Fruit very short and slender, S 1 ^-^ x l 3 4 -2 inches. Shape 
cylindrical, straight, very short oval; base and apex rounded; 
medial even. Cross-section nearly circular at the base, and slightly 
triangular at the medial and apex. Color moderately light green, 
tinted with yellowish white at the apex; tip stripes moderately nar- 
row, prominent, and extend one-third the length of the fruit. 
Tubercles moderately many, rather obscure. Spines black. Flesh 
thin, fine texture, greenish white in color. Seed mass large, solid. 

Pickles short oval, almost cylindrical; base rounded, apex 
abruptly tapered; ridges obscure, depressions absent. Cross- 
section nearly circular. Color light green, uniformly distributed. 

Early Short Prickley. Refs. 7, 9, 15, 46. Syns. Early 
Short Green Prickley, Short Prickley, Short Green 
Prickley. 

The variety name Short Green Prickley occurs in 
Mawe and Abercrombie, 1778, with a short description 
as follows: "A short fruit three or four inches long, 
the rind rather smooth and set with small black prickles ; 
is valuable principally for being one of the hardiest and 
early sorts." This description agrees with the many 
that were published in trade lists during the next 
century. 

Early Short White Prickley was considered a white- 
spined strain of Early Short Prickley. 

Early White. Refs. 19, 58, 73. 

Early White was described in the New York Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station Annual report for 1887. 
There were many introductions of white cucumbers, and 



whether this particular one became the foundation stock 
for some of the later well-known white sorts is not known. 

Fruit medium long and moderately plump, 8-9 x 2 ' £-3 inches. 
Shape oblong cylindrical, straight. Cross-section somewhat tri- 
angular. Color greenish white, becoming almost pure white at 
full maturity. Spines white. 

Early White Spine. Refs. 3, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 

19, 21, 25, 29, 34, 35, 39, 48, 55, 57, 59, 61, 62, 
72, 73, 75, 79, 80, 81. Syns. Chicago, Extraordi- 
nary White Spine, Famous Peerless, Monarch, 
Monarch White Spine, Peerless, Peerless Improved 
White Spine, Peerless White Spine, Prolific White 
Spine, Special White Spine, Success, Unexcelled 
White Spine, White Spine. 
The earliest names used for cucumbers seem to 
have been chosen for their descriptive value. The 
spines on the fruits attracted attention and among the 
very earliest names used were Short Prickley, Long 
Green Prickley and White Spined (McMahon 1806'. 
Some years later the name White Spine, (Thorburn, 1824, 
Hovey, 1834) was used. At first White Spine undoubt- 
edly referred to a rather definite type. Later the term 
White Spine was used in conjunction with other names as 
Early White Spine, Arlington White Spine, Prolific 
White Spine, etc. White Spine, used alone, disappeared, 
and the name Early White Spine came to be used 
to designate the variety. 

Arlington White Spine became even better known 
than Early White Spine but represented a somewhat 
different type. A number of carefully selected strains 
of Early White Spine were offered from time to time. 
The better known of these were Early Forcing White 
Spine and Forcing White Spine. 

Fruit medium long and medium plump, 7-8 x 2 1 4-2 3 4 inches. 
Shape somewhat cylindrical, straight; base rounded, medial slightly 
swollen, apex abruptly tapered to rounded. Cross-section nearly 
circular at base, triangular at medial and apex. Color light green, 
tinted greenish white at apex; tip stripes moderately broad, rather 
prominent, extending one-third or more the length of the fruit. 
Tubercles moderately few, rather obscure. Spines white. Flesh 
medium thick, greenish white in color. 

Mature fruits lose color rapidly and become greenish white 
to almost clear white at full maturity. 

Early Yellow Dutch. Refs. 16, 19, 58. 

This is a continental type which was described by 
Vilmorin and grown in the Geneva trials from 1884 to 
1887. It was of little if any significance to American 
gardeners, and was supposed to be larger and later than 
Early Russian and apparently well adapted for forcing 
in Europe. 

Fruit medium long and medium plump, 8-9 x 2 } 5-3 inches. 
Shape oblong oval to cylindrical, rather uneven, often curved, 
slightly furrowed. Cross-section slightly triangular except at 
the base. Color greenish white, which at full maturity becomes 
rich yellow to orange. Tubercles moderately many, rather promi- 
nent. Spines black. Flesh thick, greenish white in color, crisp. 

Emerald. Refs. 3, 20, 57, 61, 65, 75. Syns. Emerald 

Green White Spine, Florida Emerald, Florida 

Green. 

The factor of desirable and long-holding color has 

i been one of great concern to cucumber growers. One 



100 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



of the first attempts to improve this condition was 
initiated by the A. W. Livingston's Sons Seed Com- 
pany in 1889 when a desirable seedling of White Spine 
was noticed. In 1897, after 7 years selection work, 
Livingston introduced the variety, Emerald. This 
variety continued as a leading sort for many years and 
undoubtedly was a contributory factor in the develop- 
ment of superior darker green cucumbers. It has not 
been listed within recent years. 

The fruits were slightly longer than Arlington White 
Spine, more nearly cylindrical, distinctly smoother 
skinned and decidedly darker green than any other sort 
then in existence. In comparison to present day Kirby 
it was 2-3 inches shorter, slightly more circular in cross- 
section and much like it in color. 

Fruit moderately short and medium plump, 6-7 x 2l^-2}4 
inches. Shape cylindrical, straight, symmetrical; base and apex 
rounded, medial even. Cross-section circular at all portions. Color 
very dark green almost blue green, obscurely marked at apex with 
very short and narrow, dark greenish yellow stripes. Tubercles 
absent. Spines white, very sparse. Surface very smooth. Flesh 
thick, nearly white in color. Seed mass moderately small and solid. 

Everbearing. Refs. 6, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22, 52, 57, 61, 62, 

63, 64, 75, 79. Syns. Earliest Everbearing, New 
Everbearing, Thorburn Everbearing, Thorburn's 
New Everbearing. 
This unique variety was developed about 1888 by 
J. M. Thorburn and Co., and introduced one or two 
years later. Nothing is known concerning its origin 
but its similarity to Early Russian and Siberian leads one 
to suspect its relation to these or similar sorts. During 
the early years of its popularity it was acknowledged 
to be very early and exceedingly productive as evidenced 
by the statement " The vines conitnued to flower and 
produce fruit until killed by frost, whether the ripe 
cucumbers are picked off or not." This so-called ever- 
bearing habit has apparently been lost, for the stocks 
purchased during the last 8 or 10 years fail to demonstrate 
this characteristic. 

The fruits of Everbearing were 1-1 3^ inches longer 
than those of Early Russian and slightly more plump. 
The color of the two was very similar, but the tubercles 
were more numerous and prominent on Everbearing. 

Fruit short and moderately slender, 4J^£— 5 x 2—2 T 4 inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical, straight; base rounded: medial slightly 
swollen; apex rounded. Cross-section circular at the base and 
moderately triangular at medial and apex. Color medium to rather 
light green, tinted with yellowish white at the apex; tip stripes 
prominent and extend one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
many, rather prominent. Spines black. Flesh thin, rather yellow- 
ish white in color. Seed mass moderately large, with slight cavity 
in center. 

Pickles short oval ; base rounded, apex distinctly tapered with 
ridge and depressions rather marked. Cross-section distinctly tri- 
angular. Color light green, tinted white near tip. Flesh greenish 
white in color. 

Evergreen White Spine. Refs. 3, 4, 12, 18, 19, 21, 22, 

29, 39, 42, 48, 56, 57, 58, 61, 64. 75, 79. Syns. 
Century, Early Evergreen, Early Long White 
Spine, Evergreen, Evergreen Early White Spine, 
Extra Early Evergreen White Spine, Extra Long, 



Extra Long Evergreen, Extra Long White Spine, 
Improved Early Long White Spine, Long Ever- 
green White Spine, New Century, New Ever- 
green, New Evergreen White Spine, New York 
Extra Long Perfected White Spine, Pride of the 
Pacific, Toledo Market Evergreen White Spine, 
White Oak. 
One undesirable characteristic of the old White 
Spine was its poor color and its inability to hold the 
green very long after it had attained prime slicing stage. 
Various selections were made to obtain this desirable 
character, among which was one selected by Johnson and 
Stokes of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and introduced as 
Evergreen White Spine in 1886. Continued selections 
have resulted in one of our longest and most desirably 
colored varieties. The fruits are 4-5 inches longer than 
those of Arlington White Spine, much more cylindrical 
and distinctly darker green in color with much narrower 
and less prominent tip stripes. 

Fruit long and moderately plump, 10-12 x 2 1 o-3 inches. 
Shape somewhat cylindrical, straight; base and apex moderately 
tapered, medial slightly swollen. Cross-section circular at the base 
and nearly so at medial and apex. Color dark green, retained well, 
tinted pale greenish yellow at extreme apex; tip stripes narrow, 
moderately prominent and extend one-quarter to one-third the 
length of the fruit. Tubercles few but rather prominent. Spines 
white. Flesh thick, very crisp and greenish white in color. Seed 
mass moderately smooth with small triangular cavity usually 
present. 

Fojin. Syns. Mandarin, New Early Fojin, Quality. 

Dr. Yami Kin sent several varieties and strains of 
Chinese cucumbers to the Vaughan Seed Store some 
years ago. After making crosses with white-spined sorts 
and selecting the most desirable types for several years, 
the best was introduced to the trade in 1932 by Vaughan 
as Fojin. This was subsequently changed to Mandarin. 

The fruits are 3-4 inches shorter than those of 
Improved Long Green, more curved and distinctly more 
uniformly circular in cross-section. The color is much 
like that of Chinese Three Feet, although the skin 
surface is more warted than in that variety. 

Fruit medium long and slender, 8-9 x I s 4-2 inches. Shape 
oblong, slightly curved; base rounded, medial even but often 
slightly compressed, apex abruptly tapered. Cross-section cir- 
cular at all portions. Color medium dark green, covered with 
yellowish green speckles over the entire surface; tip stripes not very 
prominent, narrow and extend about one-quarter the length of the 
fruit. Tubercles few, moderately prominent. Spines white. 
Flesh rather thin, white in color. Seed mass large, solid. 

Fordhook Famous. Refs. 6, 43, 57, 75. Syns. Early 
Fordhook White Spine, Fordhook Fancy, Ford- 
hook White Spine, Imperial. 
The origin of this variety is attributed to Mr. A. 
Mclnnis, an experienced Scotch seed grower of Ontario. 
Canada. He crossed White Spine with Noa's Forcing 
about 1894 and after several years selection sold his 
entire crop to W. Atlee Burpee of Philadelphia, Pa., 
who introduced it to the American trade in 1902. 

This is one of the largest of the White Spine sorts, 
being fully as long as Evergreen White Spine, more 
triangular in cross-section, not quite as dark in color 






NATIONAL PICKLE 







BOSTON PICKLING 






SNOW'S PICKLING 



TYPES OF PICKLING CUCUMBERS 



(Natural size) 




(Natural size) 



PARISIAN PICKLE (upper) 



PERFECTED PICKLE 



CUCUMBERS 



101 



but less prominently striped and with a greater number 
of slightly more prominent tubercles. 

Fruit long and moderately plump, 10-12 x 2'_>-3 inches. 
Shape much elongated, straight: base rounded, medial slightly 
swollen and apex tapering; ridges and depressions rather marked. 
Cross-section nearly circular at the base, and triangular at medial 
and apex. Color medium to light green tinted with greenish white 
at the apex: tip stripes narrow, rather obscure and extend one- 
quarter or less the length of the fruit. Tubercles many, prominent. 
Spines white. Flesh thick, greenish white in color. Seed mass 
moderately small, solid. 

Fordhook Pickling. Refs. 57, 61, 75. Syns. Ford- 
hook, New Fordhook Pickling. 

In 1897 W. Atlee Burpee introduced this pickling 
scrt as an important acquisition to the cucumber pickle 
industry. It originated with C. P. Coy of Nebraska, 
who reported it to be the result of a cross between a 
European sort and Cool and Crisp. After seven years 
selection to attain uniformity it was sent to Burpee in 
1896. 

As grown at Geneva it was one of the longest of the 
pickling sorts, being as long as Jersey Pickling, slightly 
more plump, and distinctly more constricted near the 
basal end. The small pickles were more fusiform and 
usually slightly darker green, particularly at the 
base. 

Fruit medium long and medium plump, 7-8 x 2 1 . J -2 I ■> inches. 
Shape fusiform, usually straight, tapering from medial to base and 
apex, with a definite constriction or neck apparent. Cross-section 
nearly circular at base, triangular at medial and apex. Color 
medium green rather prominently marked with tip stripes one- 
quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles rather numerous and 
prominent, particularly towards the base. Spines black. Flesh 
moderately thin and greenish white to yellow in color. Seed mass 
moderately large and solid. 

Pickles long fusiform, thickest at the medial and tapering 
toward each end, finely ridged. Color medium to dark green, 
tinted greenish white near apex. Tubercles many, prominent. 

Fushinari. 

This is a Japanese forcing variety. It is not 
known when this variety was first introduced to the 
American trade, although it has been distributed by the 
Oriental Seed Co., San Francisco, California, at least 
since 1927. 

The fruits are similar in some respects to those of 
China Long, although those of the latter are considerably 
longer, somewhat more angular in cross-section and 
slightly darker green in color. Although prominent 
tubercles are common to both varieties, the color of the 
spines differ, those of Fushinari being black. 

Vines very vigorous, profusely branched with terminal shoots 
extended nearly upright from the ground. Leaves very large, 
distinctly wrinkled and borne on long petioles. 

Fruit medium long and slender, 8-9 x 1 ) 2-l 3 4 inches. Shape 
oblong, straight; base distinctly rounded, medial even, apex moder- 
ately rounded to very slightly tapering. Cross-section circular 
at the base, moderately triangular at the apex and medial. Color 
light green, tinted yellowish green at tip and near medial; marked 
with narrow, rather obscure tip stripes which extend one-third the 
length of the fruit. Tubercles few, large and prominent. Spines 
black. Flesh medium thick, distinctly greenish white in color. 
Seed mass medium large, with a distinct triangular cavity at 
medial. 



Geneva. Refs. 22, 23. 

Several important American varieties of forcing 
cucumbers were obtained by crossing the English forcing 
types on the American garden sorts. Such well-known 
varieties as Davis Perfect, Deltus, Rawson Hot House 
and Abundance owe their existence to such a procedure. 
Growers undoubtedly used the English types more 
because of their great length and smoothness of skin, 
than for their tendency to produce parthenocarpic 
fruits. 

At least two projects were initiated by Experiment 
Station workers to utilize the parthenocarpic character 
(the ability to produce fruits without fertilization) of 
the English cucumber. One of these was started by 
Richard Wellington in 1916 at the Minnesota Agri- 
cultural Experiment Station when he crossed Arlington 
White Spine with Rockford Market. After several years 
of selection, during which time there were many inter- 
ruptions, the line now known as Geneva was intro- 
duced in 1930 from the New York (Geneva) State 
Experiment Station. 

The fruits are borne in great profusion and differ 
from Arlington White Spine in being distinctly more 
constricted or " necked " at the base. 

Fruit long and medium plump, 10-1 2x2' £-2 } ■• inches. Shape 
cylindrical, straight and symmetrical; base distinctly and abruptly 
tapered, almost constricted, medial very slightly swollen but often 
practically even; apex rounded. Cross-section distinctly circular in 
all portions. Color rather light grayish green over the entire surface, 
very sparsely and obscurely striped at the tip for one-quarter to 
one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles very few, obscure 
with skin surface practically smooth. Spines white, obscure. 
Flesh very thick, fine, crisp, white in color. Seed mass very small 
and distinctly solid, containing very few to no seeds. 

Giant Pera. Refs. 3, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 21, 48, 49, 

56, 62, 63, 64, 75, 81, 82. Syns. Grand Pera, 
Long Giant Pera, Long Green Giant Pera, Mam- 
moth Giant Pera, New Giant Pera, Pera. 

To Dr. Harris of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, goes 
the credit of bringing to this country this unusual variety 
from Turkey. It came to the attention of W. Atlee 
Burpee of Philadelphia who, in 1886, introduced it to his 
trade. The firm of Johnson and Stokes of the same city 
also played an important part in the distribution of this 
variety having listed it at least as early as 1892. 

The fruits are about the same length and plump- 
ness of Long Green Turkey, but differ from that variety 
in being fuller at the apex, distinctly more constricted 
at the base and much smoother-skinned. The flesh is 
similar in color and decidedly thicker than that of 
many American sorts such as Longfellow, Evergreen 
White Spine and Early Fortune. 

Fruit very long and moderately plump, 12-15 x 2';j-3 inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical but often enlarged or swollen near the apex; 
straight; base tapered, often constricted, and apex abruptly tapered 
to rounded. Cross-section circular at all portions. Color light 
green with tip stripes at the apex which are narrow, rather promi- 
nent and extend one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
few and very obscure, leaving skin very smooth. Spines black. 
Flesh is very thick, fine and firm, greenish white in color. Seed 
mass small and solid. 



102 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Grow Quick. 

This is a very early and productive variety selected 
out of Chicago Pickling and introduced by the Vaughan 
Seed Store in 1929. The fruits were about the same 
size as those of Chicago Pickling, but more oval in 
shape and less tapering towards the apex. Its earliness 
and productivity were its outstanding attributes at the 
Geneva trials. 

Fruit short and moderately slender, 5-6 x 2-2 J4 inches. 
Shape short oval, often slightly curved; base distinctly tapered, 
medial moderately swollen and apex moderately rounded. Cross- 
section nearly circular at base, and distinctly triangular at medial 
and apex. Color light green, tinted yellowish green at the apex; 
tip stripes rather prominent, extend one-third to one-half the length 
of the fruit. Tubercles few and obscure. Spines black. Flesh 
medium thick and greenish white in color. 

Pickles moderately tapering at both ends, distinctly triangular 
in cross-section. Color light green, tinted greenish white at apex. 
Tubercles many, rather prominent. Flesh distinctly greenish white. 

Henderson's Perfected. Refs. 20, 49, 57, 61, 75, 82. 
Syns. Perfect White Spine, Perfected White Spine, 
Perfection White Spine, The Henderson. 

Peter Henderson, after many years of selection, 
introduced this sort in 1900 as " the most perfect of the 
White Spines yet obtained." It has apparently met the 
requirements of many growers during the past 35 years, 
for it is still featured by the originator and included 
by some of the leading wholesale seed dealers in the 
country. 

The fruits are 3-4 inches shorter than those of Ever- 
green White Spine, slightly more slender, more nearly 
circular, more rounded at the ends and nearly as well 
colored. The flesh of the two are much alike, although 
that of the Henderson is more nearly white in color. 

Fruit medium long and medium plump, 7-8 x 2 1 _-2 ■ 4 inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical, straight; base rounded, medial slightly 
swollen, apex abruptly tapered; ridges rather obscure. Cross- 
section circular at the base and slightly triangular at medial and 
apex. Color dark green, tinted greenish white at apex; tip stripes 
rather prominent, extend one-quarter to one-third the length of the 
fruit. Tubercles moderately few, not very prominent. Spines 
white. Flesh medium thick, crisp and firm, white in color. Seed 
mass moderately large, usually solid. 

Heserow. Refs. 29, 59. 

In 1910 A. H. MacClennan, at the time lecturer at 
the Ontario Agricultural College at Guelph, crossed Sut- 
ton's Everyday with Fisk's White Spine, then the 
resulting hybrid was crossed with Princess. After 
several years of selection a limited amount of seed of the 
final hybrid, Hescrow, was sent out for trial in 1920. 

The fruits are 8-10 inches long and about 2 inches 
in diameter, smooth, straight, well rounded at the 
ends and moderately dark green in color. They are 
shorter than the Geneva, more symmetrical and some- 
what darker in color. 

IliL'hcst Quality. 

Many selections of White Spine have been made. 
Highest Quality is one which originated with the Rout- 
ledge Seed and Floral Co., Portland, Oregon, sometime 
previous to 1918. As grown at Geneva, it was one of 
the earliest slicing sorts, coming into season soon after 



the pickling varieties were well into production. The 
variety is decidedly more slender than Arlington White 
Spine, more uniformly fusiform, darker green in color 
and about the same length. Its earliness and uniformity 
are its most valuable attributes. 

Fruit moderately short and moderately slender, 6-7 x 2-2 J4 
inches. Shape oblong fusiform, straight; base abruptly tapered to 
rounded, medial swollen and apex tapering. Cross-section nearly 
circular at base, triangular at medial and apex. Color moderately 
dark green, tinted dull greenish white at apex; tip stripes narrow, 
not very prominent, extend one-third the length of the fruit. 
Tubercles few and rather obscure. Spines white. Flesh medium 
thick, greenish white in color. Seed mass medium large, with a 
distinct triangular cavity at the center. 

Iceland. Syn. Burbank's Iceland. 

Luther Burbank of Santa Rosa, California, crossed 
the Lemon cucumber with Burpee's Long Snow-white 
and in 1917 introduced one of the selections as Iceland. 
This was slightly more oblong than Lemon and was 
more distinctly marked with green, especially along the 
furrows. 

Fruit very short and moderately plump, 3 ) £-4 x 2 ' 2 j 
inches. Shape short oval, symmetrical; base and apex rounded. 
Cross-section circular. Color nearly white, often regularly streaked 
with a pale greenish, narrow lace-like color pattern to conform with 
the shallow furrows. Tubercles obscure. Spines black. Flesh 
very thin, pale greenish white, very crisp and tender. Seed mass 
very large, solid, containing many seeds. 

Improved Long Green. Refs. 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 

16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 29, 34, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 
61, 62, 65, 70, 72, 74, 75, 79, 81, 82. Syns. 
California Long Green, Common Long Green, 
Diamond Long Green, Early Long Green, Excel- 
sior, Excelsior Long Green, Extra Early Long 
Green, Extra Long Green, Improved Extra Long 
Green, Improved Special Strain Long Green, 
Indianapolis Long Green, Kilgore's Dark Long 
Green, Landreth's Long Slim, Landreth's Long 
Slim Pickle, London, London Extra Long Green, 
London Long Green, London Pickler, Long Green, 
Long Green Common, Long London Green, Long 
Slim, Mammoth Long, Milwaukee Long Green. 
This is a selection from Long Green Turkey and was 
listed by Prince at least as early as 1842. Another 
selection was made from the same variety in 1870 by 
D. M. Ferry & Co., and was introduced by that concern 
two years later. This stock has become very widely 
grown and is still one of the largest sellers. 

The fruits are 2-3 inches longer than those of Davis 
Perfect, somewhat more plump, much more abruptly 
tapering at the ends, and have a more uneven, bumpy 
skin surface. Improved Long Green is slightly shorter 
than Long Green Turkey distinctly less tapered or con- 
stricted at the base, and has more nearly white flesh. 
Fruit long and moderately plump, 10-12 x 2 1 2-2 I, 4 inches. 
Shape much elongated, straight, gently tapered towards the base, 
slightly swollen at the medial and abruptly tapered at the apex: 
surface uneven and bumpy. Cross-section circular at the base, 
triangular at medial and apex. Color moderately dark green, 
sparsely tinted with yellowish white at apex; tip stripes slightly 
prominent and extend usually less than one-quarter the length of 
the fruit. Tubercles rather numerous, large and coarse, very 





%* r 



(Natural size' 



PEERLESS WHITE SPINE 




(Natural size) 



PRICE'S HYBRID 



CUCUMBERS 



103 



prominent. Spines black. Flesh thick, firm, white in color. 
Seed mass moderately small, solid. 

Irish Queen. Syn. New England. 

Irish Queen introduced in 1916 by S. M. Isbell 8b 
Co., Jackson, Michigan, was quite distinct in that the 
fruits were smooth and quite free from spines. In 
many respects the variety resembled Emerald, a variety 
which had been introduced about twenty years earlier. 
It differed from that variety in being more grayish green 
in color, in having flesh more greenish white in color, 
and in having a less solid seed mass. 

Fruit moderately short and moderately plump, 6-7 J _> x 2 ' _.-2 3 4 
inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, straight; base slightly swollen 
and rounded; apex rounded. Cross-section circular at the base, 
very nearly circular at medial and apex. Surface very smooth. 
Tubercles absent. Skin color medium to light grayish green, 
uniformly distributed over the surface; tip stripes very obscure, 
possibly one-half inch long. Spines white. Flesh thick, greenish 
white in color. Seed mass small, with triangular cavity present at 
center. 

Japanese Climbing. Refs. 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 21, 34, 57, 

61, 63, 64, 66, 75. Syns. Japan Climbing, Japan 
Dark Green, Japanese, Japanese Climbing Green, 
New Japanese Climbing. 
The seed of this variety came originally from Japan 
and was listed by Thorburn in 1892, by Gregory and 
by Rawson in 1894. The interesting character as noted 
by Gregory was that the runners kept their tips raised 
from the ground like squash vines. Rawson stated that 
the vines were of vigorous growth and that they developed 
strong grasping tendrils, which enabled them to climb 
trellises, wire netting, brush or any other suitable sup- 
port. The variety is listed today as a distinct climbing 
sort for covering fences or trellises. 

The fruits are 2-3 inches shorter than Davis Perfect, 
more nearly cylindrical and considerably lighter green 
in color. They are similar in some respects to China 
Long, but are much shorter and more circular in 
cross-section. 

Fruit medium long and moderately slender, 7-8 x 2-2 1 ■> inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical, straight, rounded at the base and apex, 
slightly swollen at the media!. Cross-section circular at base, nearly 
circular at medial and apex. Surface rather uneven and finely 
ridged. Tubercles few, but rather large and prominent. Color 
medium to moderately light green, profusely speckled with yellowish 
green over much of the surface; tip stripes narrow, not very promi- 
nent, and extend about one-quarter the length of the fruit. Spines 
black. Flesh moderately thin, very tender and crisp, slightly tart, 
distinctly greenish white in color. Seed mass moderately large 
and solid. 

Mature fruits deep russet in color, often partially covered with 
a slight netting. 

Jersey Pickling. Refs. 3, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 57, 61, 75. 

Syns. Earty Long Pickling, Extra Long Green 

Pickling, Improved Jersey Pickle, Improved Long 

Green Pickling, Jersey Extra Early Prolific Pickle, 

Jersey Pickle, Jersey Pride, Perfected Jersey 

Pickle, Perfected Pickle. 

During the last quarter of the nineteenth century 

the region in Burlington County, New Jersey, along 

the Delaware River was the leading pickle raising 

section of the country. Both the Long Green and the 



Short Green varieties were grown and many local 
strains were developed. One of these was intermedi- 
ate between Long Green and Short Green and became 
known as Jersey Pickle. It resembled Early Cluster 
in its external characters, but the fruit was rather 
more cylindrical and somewhat later in maturing. 
It was said to " green " better than any other variety. 
Jersey Pickle is used today for dill and ripe, sweet 
chunk pickles, for it is generally considered too slender 
and long for the smaller sizes. 

Fruit medium long and moderately slender, 7-8 x 2-2 >.,' inches. 
Shape somewhat mildly fusiform, straight, tapered gently from 
medial towards base and apex, base slightly constricted; ridges 
obscure. Cross-section circular at base and nearly circular at 
medial and apex. Tubercles few, rather distinct. Color medium 
green, tinted yellowish white at apex; tip stripes rather narrow, 
rather obscure and extend about one-quarter length of fruit. Spines 
black. Flesh moderately thick, white. 

Pickles long oval, rounded at the base, tapering towards the 
tip, long in proportion to thickness; rather distinctly ridged; medium 
green in color. 

Khiva. Refs. 3, 6, 16, 18, 19, 58, 75, 79. Syns. Brown 
Netted, Early Netted Russian, Khiva Netted, 
Long Netted Russian, Netted Russian, Russian 
Netted Cluster. 
The catalog of B. K. Bliss & Sons, New York, for 
1880 stated that the introduction of the Khiva-Netted 
cucumber into Europe resulted from the Russian expedi- 
tion into Khiva. The exact date of its introduction 
to this continent is unknown, but inasmuch as it was 
not described by Burr in 1863, it is assumed that it 
was brought in after that time. The description of 
Russian Netted given by Gregory in his catalog for 
1875 is so similar to that of Khiva that the two are 
considered identical. The Russian Netted was native 
to the Ukraine. This variety was early and hardy, 
and for this reason was favorably considered during 
the next twenty years. The fruits were 1-1 J ■> inches 
longer than those of Early Russian, much the same 
shape, considerably darker green in color, and had a 
more distinct netted appearance at full maturity. 

Fruit short and moderately plump, 4-5 x 2 ] £-3 inches. Shape 
short oval, straight, symmetrical; base and apex rounded, medial 
even to slightly swollen. Cross-section circular at base; moderately 
triangular at medial and apex. Color dark green at base, gradually 
blending to greenish white at apex; tip stripes prominent. Tubercles 
moderately few, slightly prominent. Spines black. Flesh thin, 
greenish white. Seed mass large. Mature fruits dark russet 
brown in color; skin tough and hard, covered with light, finely inter- 
laced network of shallow cracks. 

Kirby. Refs. 22, 29, 57. Syns. Black Diamond, D. 8b 
B. Special, Dark Green, Dark Green Sheer, 
Earliest Black Diamond, Green Pack, Kirby's 
Stays Green, Stay Green, Sunny South. 
The Kirby was introduced about 1920 by I. N. 
Simon 8b Son of Philadelphia. The name came from its 
originator, Norval E. Kirby, at that time associated with 
Mr. Simon. The name was registered through the United 
States Patent Office. During the fifteen years it has been 
offered it has grown in popularity and is believed to be un- 
excelled in its class for earliness, color and heavy yielding. 
The fruits are 1-2 inches shorter than Davis Perfect, 



104 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



slightly more slender, distinctly more rounded at the 
ends, fully as dark in color and much smoother skinned. 

Fruit medium long and moderately plump, 8-9 x 2J£-2J^ 
inches. Shape long oval, straight; base rounded, medial slightly 
swollen, and apex moderately rounded, depressions and ridges very 
slight; cross-section circular at base, slightly triangular at medial 
and nearly circular at apex. Color dark green, tinted yellowish 
white at apex; tip stripes rather broad and prominent, extending 
one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles few and obscure, surface 
smooth. Spines white. Flesh medium thick, crisp, greenish white 
in color. Seed mass moderately large and solid. 

Klondike. Refs. 11, 13, 22, 29, 52, 57, 75. Syns. 
Everlasting, Extra Early Klondike, Klondike 
Long White Spine, Klondike White Spine, New 
Klondike, New White Spine, Sterling. 

The variety Klondike was introduced by D. V. 
Burrell of Rocky Ford, Colorado, in 1902, and soon came 
to be considered one of the leading varieties for shipping 
to northern markets. It was introduced with the belief 
that the color was darker green and remained longer 
without fading than in any other sort yet developed. 
Klondike is still considered favorably in some areas. 

The fruits are 4-5 inches shorter than Evergreen 
White Spine, about as plump, more abruptly tapered 
at the ends, more triangular in cross-section, and have 
broader tip stripes. The green color of the two are much 
the same. 

Fruit medium long and moderately plump, 7-8 x 2 J £-3 inches. 
Shape elongated, straight; abruptly tapered at both ends; medial 
slightly swollen; ridges rather prominent. Cross-section circular at 
base, triangular at medial and apex. Tubercles few, obscure; 
surface moderately smooth. Color very dark green, with tip 
stripes rather broad and prominent, extending one-quarter to one- 
third length of the fruit. Spines white. Flesh moderately thick, 
greenish white in color. 

Mature fruits pale greenish yellow in color. 

Lemon. Refs. 22, 57, 75. Syns. Apple Shaped, Garden 
Lemon. 
This novelty was noted in the 1894 catalog of 
Samuel Wilson, Mechanicsville, Pennsylvania, in the 
1908 catalog of Thorbum & Co. and in 1909 by Aggeler 
& Musser of Los Angeles. In 1918 Joseph Harris, 
Coldwater, New York, aptly illustrated the Lemon 
cucumber and wrote " This is a real cucumber that 
grows about the size and shape of a lemon." In Australia, 
under the name Apple Shaped, it is well established and is 
sold on the markets in large quantity. In this country 
the variety has been most favorably received in Cali- 
fornia. Although Lemon cucumber is often used to 
designate a variety of Cucumi's melo var. chito, the 
name is used commonly in America as " for " a multi- 
locular form of C. sativus. 

Fruit very short and plump, 3-3 *j x 2-2 J^ inches. Shape 
broad, short oval, cylindrical, symmetrical: base and apex rounded, 
ridges slightly pronounced. Cross-section circular to somewhat 
pentagonal at all portions. Tubercles very numerous, minute. 
Color pale greenish yellow turning to lemon yellow then to golden 
yellow at full maturity: tip stripes barely apparent. Spines black, 
many, transparent at certain stages. Flesh very thin, white, faint 
lemon-like flavor in late stages of development. Seed mass very 
large, greenish white, many-seeded, attached to five placentae, 
pentagonal cavity in center. 



Long Grecian. Refs. 3, 9, 16, 18, 19, 58, 60, 75, 82. 

Syns. Athenian, Athens, Extra Long Green 

Smooth, Extra Long Smooth, Grecian, Long Green 

Smooth, New Long Grecian. 

This was a European variety listed by Hovey & Co. 

in 1870, by Gregory in 1885 and by Maule in 1889. It 

was grown at Geneva and described in the annual report 

of this Station for 1887. In spite of the somewhat 

attractive long fruits, it never became very popular, 

because of the relative unproductiveness of the plant. 

Fruit long and moderately plump, 10-12 x 2 '2— 3 inches. 
Shape nearly cylindrical, straight; base tapered, often necked or 
constricted; apex rounded, medial even. Cross-section nearly 
circular at all portions. Color bright green, somewhat lighter near 
apex. Surface somewhat uneven, shallowly furrowed. Tubercles 
absent. Spines black. Flesh thick and white in color. Seed 
mass small. 

Long Green Turkey. Refs. 3, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 

19, 21, 25, 46, 48, 57, 75. Syns. Extra Early 
Green Turkey, Green Turkey, Improved Extra 
Long Green Turkey, Landreth First, Landreth 
First Early, Long Smooth Green Turkey, Long 
Turkey, Turkey. 
Mawe and Abercrombie in 1778 described the Long 
Smooth Green Turkey thus, " The plants are strong 
growers with very large leaves and long, smooth, green 
rinded fruit, without prickles, attaining from ten to fifteen 
inches in length." Burr in 1863 gave considerable 
emphasis to the variety, noting particularly the long 
slender form contracted towards the stem and swollen 
towards the opposite end, the few seeds, and remark- 
ably firm and crisp flesh. Long Green Turkey was 
the prototype for Improved Long Green, the standard 
cucumber for many years for both slicing and pickling 
purposes. 

Longfellow. Ref. 22. Syns. Cliffwood Longfellow, 
Fairfield Giant, New Longfellow, Penny Pack 
Valley. 

Longfellow was introduced in 1927 by Jerome B. 
Rice Seed Co., Cambridge, New York. The variety was 
developed from a cross in which one parent was the 
dark colored Emerald. It produces a very attractive 
fruit and has been used by the private gardener and the 
truck grower as a " straight pack " sort for shipment to 
high grade markets. 

The fruits are about 2 inches shorter than those of 
the Vaughan, considerably more slender, much more 
uniformly rounded at the ends and somewhat darker 
green in color. 

Fruit long and moderately plump, 10-12 x 2 1 4-2 1 o inches. 
Shape cylindrical, elongated, symmetrical, straight; base rounded 
and apex abruptly tapered. Cross-section circular at base, nearly 
circular at medial and apex. Tubercles moderately few, slightly 
prominent. Color very dark green; tip stripes rather obscure, dark 
yellowish green, very narrow and extend one-quarter the length of 
the fruit. Spines white. Flesh moderately thick, greenish white 
in color. Seed mass moderately small and solid. 

Mountain Perfection. Ref. 22. 

This variety was introduced in 1928 by Grand 
Junction Seed Co., Colorado. It is a late variety 









1 



MATURE CUCUMBER FRUITS TO ILLUSTRATE VARIETAL COLOR RANGE 



(Natural size! 




SALAD 



CUCUMBERS 



105 



producing long, attractive, rather smooth, dark green 
fruits. In type it somewhat resembles the Vaughan 
but is smoother and has less prominent tubercles. 

Fruit very long and moderately plump. 12 14 x 2 \ _. 2 • , inches. 
Shspe much elongated, symmetrical, slightly curved. Base taper- 
ing, often somewhat constricted, medial even, apex slightly tapered; 
ridges and depressions slight. Cross-section circular at base, 
slightly triangular at medial and moderately triangular at apex. 
Color moderately dark green over most of the surface; tip stripes 
very narrow and very inconspicuous, often nearly absent, not to 
exceed one-eighth the length of the fruit. Tubercles medium many, 
and rather obscure. Spines, white. Flesh medium thick, very firm, 
greenish white in color. Seed mass medium large and solid. 

Muscatine Pickling. 

This was a pickling strain cf western origin, sym- 
metrical, of deep green color, blunt ended and very 
desirable. It was introduced in 1910 by D. M. Ferry 
6b Co., Detroit, Michigan, and cataloged until 1916. 

.National Pickle. Ref. 22. Syn. National Association 
Pickling. 

In 1924. after it had become apparent that there was 
no one variety adaptable both for small pickle sizes and 
dills, the National Pickle Packers Association appointed 
a committee to work with the Michigan Agricultural 
Experiment Station in breeding a new strain which 
would combine the desirable characteristics of the best 
varieties. George Starr began work on the problem at 
Michigan, and after five years a strain was deemed suf- 
ficiently fixed to be introduced. It was distributed 
through the Association and given the name National 
Pickle. Although this new variety has been tested and 
favorably reported by the packers from coast to coast, 
it has just begun to find its place among the established 
sorts. 

The fruits of this variety are intermediate in size 
to those of Chicago and Snow. It is most like Snow in 
shape, although the pickles of the latter are often some- 
what more tapered at the tip than are those of National 
Pickle. 

Fruit short and slender, 5'_>-6 x l^-l's inches. Shape 
nearly cylindrical, slightly enlarged at base, straight; base rounded, 
medial even; apex nearly rounded. Cross-section circular at base 
and medial, somewhat triangular near apex. Tubercles moderately 
many, rather obscure. Color medium green, tinted yellowish 
white near apex; tip stripes narrow, yellowish green in color and 
extend one-third the length of the fruit. Spines black. Flesh 
thin, greenish white. Seed mass large and solid. 

Pickles oval to cylindrical, rounded at the base and nearly so 
at the apex; cross-section nearly circular, occasionally somewhat 
triangular, depressions very slight. Color moderately dark green 
at the base and rather light to medium green at medial and apex. 

NichoPs Medium Green. Refs. 3, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 

18, 19, 20, 48, 49, 56, 57, 64, 75, 79, 82. Syns. 

Medium Green, Medium Pickling, Nichol's Green. 
This was one of the first important varieties intro- 
duced after Burr published his book in 1863. A. W. 
Livingston & Sons, Columbus, Ohio, obtained seed of 
this new strain in the late seventies and after some years 
trial offered it in 1884 as a novelty. This listing was 
followed by that of Peter Henderson & Co., in 1886 and 
by D. M. Ferry & Co., in 1888. In type it somewhat 
resembled Early Frame and Green Prolific. 



Fruit moderately short and moderately plump, 6-7 x 2 ' ■_. 3 
inches. Shape short oval, straight; rounded at the base; medial 
siightly swollen; apex rounded to slightly tapering, ridges rather 
marked. Cross-section nearly circular at base, moderately tri- 
angular at medial and apex. Color rather light green, profusely 
tinted with yellowish white at apex and medial; tip stripes promi- 
nent, extend one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles few, 
obscure. Spines black. Flesh medium thick, crisp, white in color. 
Seed mass moderately large, usually solid, occasionally with tri- 
angular cavity at center. 

Parisian Pickle. Refs. 6, 13, 20, 57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 75, 
79. Syns. Improved Bourbonne, Long Green 
Parisian, Long Parisian, Paris Early Cluster 
Pickle, Paris Pickling, Parisian Prolific Pickling. 

This is a French variety known in Europe as 
Improved Eourbonne and used extensively for the manu- 
facture of gherkins or cornichons much the same as 
the West India Gherkins are used in America. When the 
variety was brought to America for the first time is 
not known, although Gregory listed it as early as 1892. 

In many respects it resembles the Cumberland and 
the Danish Pickle, but Parisian Pickle is intermediate in 
size. The color is much the same, being decidedly darker 
green than any of the commonly used pickling varieties 
in this country. 

Fruit moderately long and medium plump, 9-10 x 2?.j— 2J-^ 
inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, straight but often slightly curved; 
base tapered, medial slightly swollen and apex abruptly tapered. 
Tubercles very numerous, rather small, prominent. Cross-section 
nearly circular at all portions. Color dark green, sparsely striped 
at the apex. Spines black, small, very numerous. Flesh thick, 
greenish white in color. Seed mass small and solid. 

Pickles long, slender, cylindrical, often curved; tapered at 
base and apex; medial even; ridges obscure; cross-section circular. 
Color dark green, except at extreme apex. Spines black, very 
numerous, hair-like. Flesh thick and seeds inconspicuous. 

President. 

Information regarding the origin of President 
cucumber is not available. It was introduced in 1928 by 
Walter S. Schell, Inc., Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. The 
fruits are very attractive in appearance and resemble 
Emerald and Straight Eight. The fruits are slightly 
longer than those of Straight Eight, somewhat more 
plump and not quite as dark in color. 

Fruit moderately long and moderately plump, 9-10 x 2%-3 
inches. Shape cylindrical, straight, symmetrical. Base rounded, 
medial even and apex rounded. Cross-section circular at all por- 
tions. Color dark green, finely speckled over most of the surface 
with pale greenish yellow; tip stripes narrow, rather prominent, 
less than one-quarter the length of the fruit. Tubercles few and 
very obscure; surface smooth, even at the pickling stages. Spines 
white. Flesh thick, greenish white in color. Seed mass small 
and solid. 

Roadside Market Wonder. Ref. 22. 

This is an exceedingly vigorous variety introduced 
in 1927 by the Grand Junction Seed Company, Grand 
Junction, Colorado. It is very similar to Vaughan, 
being slightly shorter and decidedly smoother with less 
taper or constriction at the base. 

Fruit long and medium plump, 10-12 x 2'j-2 ; inches. 
Shape cylindrical, slightly curved. Base tapering, medial slightly 
swollen, apex abruptly tapered. Cross-section circular at all 
portions. Color moderately dark green, tinted with yellowish 



106 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



white at apex; tip stripes very narrow, not prominent and extend 
one-quarter or less the length of the fruit. Tubercles few and 
obscure. Spines white. Flesh very thick, greenish white in color. 
Seed mass very small, solid. 

Salad. Syn. White. 

This novelty originated with Mrs. T. P. Mony of 
Oakland, California, who sent a few seeds to Aggeler 
& Musser of Los Angeles, California, in 1920. After 
a year's trial it was introduced as White, although in 
1924 the name was changed to Salad, and as such is still 
offered. 

The fruits are most like those of White Wonder, 
but differ from that variety in color, being more greenish 
yellow at the immature stage and brighter lemon yellow 
at full maturity. 

Fruit moderately short and moderately slender, 6-7 x 2-2 1 j 
inches. Shape irregularly oval, straight; base rounded, usually 
larger than apex, medial somewhat unevenly swollen, apex tapered. 
Cross-section nearly circular at base, triangular at medial and 
apex. Color pale greenish yellow at immature stage, changing 
to lemon yellow and at full maturity bright yellow. Tubercles 
moderately few but prominent. Spines black. Flesh uneven in 
thickness, thinner along furrows, very juicy and mildly flavored. 
White in color. Seed mass large, with small triangular cavity 
present at center, tissue light green in color. 

Siberian. Refs. 6, 12, 13, 14, 21, 23, 49, 57, 63, 75, 79. 

Syns. Early Siberian, Extra Early Siberian, New 

Siberian. 
This small early sort was introduced by Northrup, 
Braslan and Goodwin of Minneapolis, Minnesota, in 
1889. No definite information concerning its origin is 
available although its name would lead one to suspect 
its relationship to Early Russian. The fruits are 1 J 2 _ 2 
inches longer than those of Early Russian, slightly 
more tapered at the base, much the same color, and 
distinctly more spiny. 

Fruits short and slender, S-S 1 ^ x l"g-2 inches. Shape short 
oval, straight, symmetrical; base abruptly tapered, medial even and 
apex rounded. Cross-section nearly circular in all portions. Color 
medium to rather light green over the entire surface; tip stripes 
prominent and extend one-half the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
many, very small, pimple-like. Spines black, very many. 

Mature fruits orange brown in color with skin considerably 
cracked, much like that of Netted Russian. 

Snow's Pickling. Ref. 22. Syns. Fancy Pickle, Fancy 
Pickling, Snow's Early, Snow's Fancy Pickling, 
Snow's Perfected Pickle. 
To Mr. J. C. Snow of the famous Snow Pickle Farm 
of Rockford, Illinois, goes the credit of originating this 
very popular pickling variety. It resulted from a 
selection made by Mr. Snow out of Chicago Pickling 
sometime prior to 1905 after which it was listed by 
the Vaughan Seed House of Chicago, Illinois. The 
fruits are a little shorter than those of Chicago Pickling 
and lack the heavy shoulders at the stem end of that 
variety. It is primarily used for small pickle manu- 
facture, for it is usually considered to be too short and 
chubby for good dill size. 

Fruit short and slender, 5-6 x 1 '■ -V ■ :nches. Shape nearly 
cylindrical, straight, moderately symmetrical; base rounded, medial 
even, slightly tapering to base and abruptly tapered to rounded apex. 
Cross-section nearly circular at base, slightly triangular at medial 



and apex. Color moderately dark green, somewhat lighter at apex; 
tip stripes narrow, rather prominent and extend one-third the 
length of the fruit. Tubercles few. rather obscure and small. 
Spines black. Flesh thin, greenish white in color. Seed mass 
moderately large, with small triangular cavity at medial. 

Pickles short oval; base rounded; apex moderately rounded; 
ridges obscure, depressions slight. Cross-section moderately tri- 
angular. Color moderately dark green at base, tinted greenish 
white at apex. Tubercles medium in number and evenly distributed. 

Stxaight-8. 

This variety, listed for the first time in 1935 was 
originated by Ferry-Morse Seed Co. of Detroit. Where 
grown in competitive trials it has received universal 
acclaim and received a gold medal in the 1935 All America 
Awards. Selections in a field of a white spined variety 
were first made in 1928. These selections were continued 
as separate lines, one of which having a high degree of 
fruitfulness, was considered of unusual value. Five 
generations of inbreeding resulted in the perfection of 
this new sort which was sent out for trade trial in a 
limited way in 1934. 

Fruit medium long and moderately slender, 8-9 x 2-2 1 4 inches. 
Shape cylindrical, very symmetrical, straight; base and apex uni- 
formly rounded, medial even; ridges and depressions absent. Cross- 
section circular at all portions. Color very dark green, marked 
obscurely with narrow dark greenish tip stripes, one-quarter or 
less the length of the fruit. Tubercles moderately many, small and 
rather obscure. Spines white. Flesh medium thick and nearly 
white in color. Seed mass medium large and solid. 

Tailby"* Hybrid. Refs. 3, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 21. 26, 

48, 50, 57, 75, 76, 79. Syns. Bismarck, Giant 

Tailby Hybrid, Improved Bismarck, New Orleans 

Market, Peerless New Orleans Market, Tailby. 

Joseph Tailby of Wellesley, Massachusetts, was one 

of the first American gardeners to cross the so-called 

American cucumber with the English forcing sorts. He 

used White Spine and Dickson's All-the -Year-Round, 

one of the largest and most attractive sorts, to obtain 

his hybrid. It was exhibited for the first time at the 

annual show of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society 

in 1872 and was acclaimed a decided acquisition to 

the industry. Two of the first seedsmen to offer it 

were James J. H. Gregory of Marblehead, Mass., who 

included it in his catalog of 1874 and B. K. Bliss of 

New York in 1878. The fruits of this variety were 

somewhat larger than White Spine and apparently 

retained much of the smoothness of the English parent. 

Records indicate that it was a profuse yielder. 

Fruit medium long and moderately plump, 8-9 x 2 , 2-2 3 4 
inches. Shape oblong fusiform, straight; base and apex tapered, 
medial swollen; surface rather uneven. Cross-section moderately 
triangular at base and distinctly so at medial and apex. Color 
very dark green, often finely speckled with yellowish-green; tip 
stripes obscure and extend less than one-quarter the length of the 
fruit. Tubercles few, rather obscure except in young stages. 
Spines white. Flesh thick, white in color. 

Vaughan. Refs. 22, 57. 

Originally the Vaughan was a greenhouse forcing 
variety which was developed by a Mr. Dilger of Chicago, 
Illinois. It was secured by the Vaughan Seed Store and 
introduced to the trade in 1920. Apparently some 
selection was practiced, for now the variety is recom- 




\ 



I 





iTwo-thirds natural size 



VAUGHAN 



DAVIS PERFECT 




'Three-fourths natural size) 



WEST INDIA GHERKIN 



CUCUMBERS 



107 



mended by its introducer as a greenhouse cucumber 
suitable for outdoor growing. 

The fruits are 2 4 inches longer than those of Davis 
Perfect and somewhat more plump. They are tapered 
more abruptly at the base and somewhat more abruptly 
at the apex and are darker green in color with less promi- 
nent tip stripes. 

Windemoor Wonder, although introduced in 1917 by 
Stokes Seed Farms Co. originated from a cross between 
Telegraph and Davis Perfect. Present stocks are so 
much like the Vaughan that the two are considered 
synonymous. 

Fruit very long and moderately plump, 12-14 x 2 3 4 -3 inches. 
Shape cylindrical, straight, symmetrical; base usually long tapered 
or constricted, medial even to very slightly swollen, apex abruptly 
tapered. Cross-section circular at all portions. Color dark green, 
tinted very slightly at extreme apex with dark greenish yellow: tip 
stripes very narrow, rather obscure and extend one-eighth or less 
the length of the fruit. Tubercles moderately few, large, rather 
prominent. Spines white. Flesh thick, very crisp, greenish white 
in color. 

West India Gherkin. Refs. 3, 6, 7, 13, 15, 16, 19, 21, 

22, 25, 56, 57, 58, 70, 75, 80. Syns. Burr, Gherkin, 
Jerusalem Pickle, Prickly Fruited Gherkin, Prickly 
Gherkin, Senfgurken, Short Green Gherkin, 
Small Gerkin, Small Green Pickling, Small West 
Indian Gherkin, West India, West India Burr, 
West Indian Gherkin. 
Although this scrt belongs to the species Cucumis 
Anguria, its widespread usage as a pickling sort, 
qualifies it for inclusion in this account. As pointed out 
in the first chapter, the variety is believed to have 
originated in Africa from whence it was transported to the 
West Indies. It w r as introduced to the United States 
from Jamaica by Minton Collins of Richmond, Virginia, 
in 1793. M'Mahon included it in his Gardeners Cata- 
logue of 1806 and Comstock, Ferre of Wethersfield, 
Connecticut, listed it at least as early as 1846. 

The fruits are obviously entirely distinct from any 
other cucumber. Although it is exceedingly prolific and 
apparently somewhat resistant to the common diseases 
of Cucurbitaceae, it has a rather limited usage. 

Plants very vigorous, slender vines, 7-8 feet long, profusely 
branched. Leaves small and moderately broad, very deeply and 
profusely lobed, much like those of the watermelon, slightly 
pubescent, nearly smooth. 

Fruit very small, very short and plump, 2—2 J 2 x 1 J-i - 1 T j 
inches. Shape short oval, cylindrical, straight and symmetrical; 
rounded at base and apex, even at the medial. Cross-section 
circular at all portions. Ridges and depressions absent. Color 
very pale green, rather glossy. Spines pale green, very numerous, 
fleshy, short and thick. Flesh very thin, tough, distinctly greenish 
in color. Seed mass very large, solid; containing an abundance 
of very small seeds. Stem at least 3 times as long as the fruit, 
tapering from base of fruit to the vine. 

White German. Refs. 3, 4, 11, 17, 18, 19, 21, 48, 73, 

75, 82. Syns. Extra Long White, Giant White, 

Long Snow White, Long White, New Giant 

White, Panmure Long White, White Dutch. 

A long white cucumber has been recorded at least 

as early as 1778 when Mawe and Abercrombie included 

Long Smooth White Turkey in their discussion of varie- 



ties. It is not known when this type was introduced to 
America, however, Gregory is known to have cataloged 
White German as early as 1881 and continued it for 
many years. Various names have been applied to the 
type, perhaps the most recent being that of Panmure 
Long White listed by Maule in 1913 and continued 
until 1926. 

The fruits were considerably longer than White 
Wonder, much less warted and decidedly more circular 
in cross-section. The type is no longer offered by 
American seedsmen. 

Fruit long and medium plump, 10-12 x 2 '4-2 J ■> inches. Shape 
nearly cylindrical, straight; base abruptly tapered, medial even to 
slightly swollen, apex rounded. Cross-section nearly circular at 
all portions. Color greenish white, cream or ivory white at full 
maturity. Tubercles rather obscure. Spines black. Flesh white, 
very thick. 

White Wonder. Refs. 6, 11, 13, 21, 57, 63, 64, 65, 75. 
Syns. Albino, Ivory King, Jack Frost, Landreth's 
White Slicing, White Albino. 

The seeds of a white cucumber were sent to W. 
Atlee Burpee of Philadelphia from a customer in Western 
New York in the spring of 1890. In trial this was 
thought to have considerable merit and was, accordingly, 
introduced by the firm in 1893. Nothing is known con- 
cerning the origin or development of the variety, but 
since white fruited sorts were known to be in existence, 
it is highly probable that it came as a selection from 
White Pearl, White Spanish, or a similar sort. 

The fruits are much like those of the Salad cucumber 
and differ chiefly from that variety in color of skin, that 
of White Wonder being nearly greenish white to ivory 
white throughout the various stages of its growth. 

Fruit moderately short and medium plump, 6-7 x 2 1 4~ 2 ' 2 
inches. Shape somewhat irregularly oval; base rounded, medial 
somewhat swollen, one side more so than the other, apex abruptly 
tapered. Cross-section nearly circular at base, decidedly triangular 
at medial and apex; depressions and ridges marked. Color ivory 
white at slicing stage to ivory yellow at maturity. Tubercles 
moderately many, prominent. Spines black, although those about 
the base of the stem appear to be white. Flesh moderately thin, 
crisp, firm, very mild, nearly white in color. Seed mass moder- 
ately large, solid and pale green in color. 

Woodruff Hybrid. Refs. 22, 57. Syn. New Hybrid 
Spine. 

This variety was developed by a grower in Massa- 
chusetts from a cross between Arlington White Spine 
and one of the long smooth English forcing cucumbers. 
It was introduced by F. H. Woodruff and Sons of Mil- 
ford, Connecticut. 

The fruits are somewhat like those of Davis Perfect 
in size, but have more abruptly tapered ends, more 
prominent tubercles and are somewhat more triangular 
in cross-section. 

Fruit moderately long and medium plump, 9-10 x 2' 4 2 ' _> 
inches. Shape nearly cylindrical, straight; base rounded to abruptly 
tapered, often slightly swollen; medial slightly swollen, apex abruptly 
tapering; ridges and depressions rather marked. Cross-section 
triangular at all portions. Color dark green; tip stripes prominent 
and extend one-quarter to one-third the length of the fruit. Tubercles 
moderately many, very prominent. Spines white. Flesh moder- 
ately thick, very fine and crisp, greenish white in color. Seed 
mass moderately small and solid. 



108 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



SUPPLEMENTARY LIST OF OBSCURE VARIETIES 



The names given below represent varieties which 
can be considered of minor importance and about which 
little information is available ; varieties of forcing cucum- 
bers about which no data were obtained ; varieties which 



Achievement. 

Adams Forcing. 

African Horned. [C. dipsaceus) 

Syn. Climbing. Ref. 75. 
Alaska. Ref. 75. 
Arctic White. 
Arlington White Spine Forcing. 

Refs. 42, 75. 
Astonisher. Refs. 3, 48. 
Astro. Refs. 20, 49, 66, 75. 
Aviator. Ref. 35. 
Black Beauty. 
Boston Forcing White Spine. 

Syn. Boston Market Forcing. 

Ref. 75. 
Boston Market. Syn. Early 

Boston Market. Refs. 3, 75. 
Breck's Forcing White Spine. 
Brewster's Millions. 
Burrell's Pickling. 
California Pickling. Ref. 75. 
Champion Pickler. 
Chesterfield. Ref. 75. 
Cincinnati Pickle. Ref. 75. 
Climbing Delicatessen. Ref. 75. 
Colorite. 

Cream City Pickle. Ref. 75. 
Crescent. 

Cynosure. Ref. 35. 
Earl i best. 

Earliest. Refs. 21, 40. 
Barly Forcing White Spine. 

Refs. 75, 82. 
Early Giant. Ref. 36. 
Early Green Hill. 
Early Green Table. Ref. 7. 
Early Market. Refs. 21, 75. 
Early Marvel. 
Early Prize. Ref. 75. 
Early Wonder. 
Elite Pickling. 
Emerald King. 
English Hybrid White Spine. 



Eskimo. Syns. Eskimoso, Extra 

Early Eskimoso. Refs. 21, 

65, 75. 
Evergreen Pickling. 
Extra Early Conqueror. 
Famous Nugreen. Syn. Nu- 

green. 
Favorite Pickling. Ref. 75. 
Fejina. Ref. 16. 
Flanigan's Prize. 
Garden Gem. Ref. 75. 
Gem Prolific. 
General Grant. Refs. 2, 3, 54, 

75. 
Giant German. Ref. 75. 
Giant King. 
Gladiator. Syn. Green Long 

Gladiator. Refs. 58, 75. 
Golden Harvest. 
Gould's Pickling. 
Graham White. 

Grand Rapids Forcing. Ref. 52. 
Green bac. 

Green Fournier. Refs. 52, 75. 
Green Giant Forcing. Refs. 58, 

75. 
Green Mountain. Refs. 3, 49. 
Grey's A-l. 
Half Long. Ref. 75. 
Heinz's Pickle. Ref. 22. 
Hills Forcing White Spine. 

Refs. 57, 61. 
Hoke's White. 
Holmes Perfect. 
Howard. 

Hybrid White Spine. 
Ideal Market. 
Incomparable. 
Infallible. 

International. Ref. 75. 
Iowa Standard. 
Irondequoit Hothouse. 
Ivory Monarch. Refs. 64, 75. 



were in existence for a very short period; or varieties 
the seed of which is not available today and therefore 
no plantings could be made to determine their status 
with reference to recognized standard sorts. 



Japanese Climbing White. Ref. 

75. 
Japanese Crystal Wax. 
Jewel. Ref. 20. 
King of Picklers. Ref. 75. 
Land and Water. Ref. 28. 
Large Early Market. 
Leonard's Greenhouse. 
Lilly's Pickling. 
Longcu. 

Longest of All. Ref. 3. 
Long Gem. Ref. 3. 
Long German. Ref. 75. 
Long Island Pickling. Ref. 75. 
Long Spanish. 
Long Turkish. Ref. 58. 
Majestic. 
Martin's Pickling. 
Mill's Hybrid Wonder. 
Milwaukee Forcing. 
Milwaukee Pickle. Refs. 12, 48, 

75. 
Mimms New. 
Money Maker. 
Muscovic. 

Napoleon III. Ref. 9. 
Needle-Gun. Ref. 27. 
Nepal. Ref. 9. 
New Grand Forcing. 
New Jersey Hybrid. Ref. 75. 
New York Market. Ref. 19. 
None Such. Refs. 21, 61, 66, 75. 
Noroton Select White Spine. 
Northern Beauty. Ref. 35. 
Northern Market. 
Northwestern Beauty. 
O. K. Perfect Pickling. Refs. 

3, 17, 19. 
Pearl. Refs. 60, 75. Syn. White 

Pearl. 
Perfect Pickling. Ref. 3. 
Perfection Forcing. Ref. 52. 
Pressing Perfected Pickling. 



Price's Hybrid. 

Pride of Tennessee. 

Princess. Ref. 59. 

Prize Taker. Ref. 75. 

Prolific Forcing. 

Prosperity. 

Rawson's Hothouse. Refs. 29, 

52. 
Rockford Market. Refs. 29, 75. 
Rockford Pickle. Refs. 61, 75. 
St. Louis Pickling. Ref. 75. 
San Francisco Pickling. Ref. 75. 
Satisfaction. Refs. 34, 35, 52. 
Schell's Standard. 
Shamrock. 
Short Horn. 
Sikkim. Refs. 6, 64. 
Simon's Hot House. 
Southern Pickle. 
Southern Pride. 
Special Forcing. 
Special Hothouse. 
Superior Dark Green. 
Surprise. 
Temley Hybrid. 
Veridark. 
Vick's Hothouse. 
War Club. Refs. 14, 49, 50. 
Western Glass. 
White Japan. Refs. 1, 17, 19, 

20, 62, 75. 
White Pera. Ref. 75. 
White Snow. Ref. 75. 
White Spanish. Ref. 73. 
White Spined Long Green. Ref. 

19. 
White Spine Pickling. 
Windsor Pickling. Ref. 75. 
Wonder. 
Wonder green. 
Wood's Hybrid. 
Woodruff's Wonder. 
XL All. Ref. 40. 



CUCUMBERS 



109 



REFERENCES FOR CUCUMBERS 



1. Amer. Hort. Ann. 133. 1869. 

2. Amer. Hort. Ann. 120. 1871. 
.5. Ann. of Hort. 116-117. 1889. 
I. Ann. of Hort. 182. 1891. 

5. Ann. of Hort. 172. 1892. 

6. Bailey. L. H. Cyclopedia of Hort. 2:905-907. 1914. 

7. Bridgeman, Thos. The Young Gardener's Assistant. C. M. 

Saxton & Co., N. Y. 65-66. 1857. 

8. Brill, F. Farm Gardening & Seed Growing. Orange Judd, 

New York. 93-94. 1883. 

9. Burr, Fearing. Jr. Field and Garden Vegetables of America. 

Crosby & Nichols, Boston, Mass. 158-168. 1865. 
111. Butz. Geo. C. Penn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 14:6. 1890. 

11. Butz. Geo. C. and Baldwin, Geo. Penn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 133. 

1893. 

12. Canadian Cent. Exp. Farm Rpt. Div . of Hort. 127-128. 

1897. 

13. Canadian Cent. Exp. Farm Rpt. Div. of Hort. 350. 1905. 
11. Crandall, Chas. S. Col. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 48. 1890. 

15. Fessenden. T. G. New American Gardener. J. B. Russell, 

Boston, Mass. 182-92. 1828. 

16. Goff, E. S. N. Y. Air. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 206-207. 1884. 
IT. Goff, E. S. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 123-124. 1885. 
IK. Goff, E. S. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 239-240. 1886. 
19. Goff, E. S. TV. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 230-242. 1887. 
2(1. Goff, E. S. N. Y. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 121-122. 1888. 

21. Hansen, N. E. S. D. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 68:138. 1900. 

22. Hawthorn, L. R. Texas Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 508:50-55. 1935. 

23. Hawthorn. L. R. and Wellington, R. N. Y. Geneva Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 580. 1930. 
21. Hedrick, U. P. Sturtevant's Notes on Edible Plants. J. B. 

Lyon, Albany, N. Y. 1919. 
25. Henderson, Peter. Gardening for Profit. Orange Judd, New 

York. 144-148. 1867. 
2l> Horticulturist 1:143. 1846. 

27. Horticulturist 27:190. 1872. 

28. Horticulturist 27:255. 1872. 

29. Jones. H. A. and Rosa. J. T. Truck Crop Plants. McGraw- 

Hill, New York. 435-445. 1928. 
311. Jour, of Hort. 3:696. 1862. 

31. Jour, of Hort. 20:72. 1871. 

32. Jour, of Hort. 23:39. 1872. 

33. Jour, of Hort. 27:77. 1874. 

31. your. Roy. Hort. Soc. 31:245-247. 1906. 

35. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 37:399-402. 1911. 

36. Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. 38:576-577. 1913. 

37. Lindley, George. Guide to Orchard 

London, England. 1831. 

38. M'Mahon, Bernard, Amer. Gard. Cat 

delphia. Pa. 1806. 

39. Market Growers Jour. 2:8. 1908. 
Ml. Market Growers Jour. 1:8. 1909. 

41. Market Growers Jour. 9:368. 1911. 

42. Marie* Grouers /our. 12:70. 1913. 

43. Market Growers Jour. 11:185-186. 1914. 



Kitchen Garden. 



B. Graves, Phila- 



H. Market Growers Jour. 26:90. 1920. 

15. Market Growers Jour. 12:273,274. 1928. 

16. Mawe, Thomas and Abercrombie, John. Dictionary of Garden- 

ing and Botany, London. 1778. 

17. Miller, Philip. The Gardener's Dictionary. London. 1768. 

18. Minott, C. W. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 137. 1889. 

19. Minott, C. W. Vt. Agr. Exp. Sta. Rpt. 159. 1890. 

511. Morgan. H. A. and Lee, J. G. La. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3 (2nd 
Ser. i: 56. 1890. 

51. Naudin, Charles, Ann. Nat. Sci. 4 ser. XI. 28. 1859. 

52. Rane, F. W. and Hall, H. F. N. H. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 125: 167 

1906. 

53. Rawson, W. W. Success in Market Gardening. Pub. by 

author, Arlington, Mass. 131-134. 1892. 
51. Rec. of Hort. 2:93-94. 1868. 

55. Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 3:7. 1891. 

56. Richman, E. S. Utah Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 20:24. 1893. 

57. Robinson. L. R. The Cucurbits, Booklet. J. C. Robinson 

Co., Waterloo. Neb. 1-8. New Edition. 1937. 

58. Robinson, W. The Vegetable Garden. John Murray, London, 

264-285. 1920. 

59. Strong, W. J. Proc. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 271-273. 1921. 
61). Taft, L. R. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 70:12. 1891. 

61. Taft, L. R. and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 190: 

130. 1901. 

62. Taft, L. R. and Gladden, H. P. Mich. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 79:8. 

1892. 

63. Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P. and Hedrick, U. P. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 120:22. 1895. 
61. Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P. and Hedrick. U. P. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 131:17. 1896. 
63. Taft, L. R., Gladden, H. P.. and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 144:217. 1897. 

66. Taft, L. R., Gladden. H. P., and Dean, M. L. Mich. Agr. 

Exp. Sta. Bui. 153:232. 1897. 

67. The Cottage Gardener 21:261. 1860. 

68. The Cottage Gardener 21:167. 1860. 

69. The Cottage Gardener 25:236. 1861. 

70. The Cultivator 6 i3rd Ser. i : 48. 1858. 

71. The Cultivator 8 3rd Ser. 1:313. 1860. 

72. Tilton's Jour, of Hort. 3:358-362. 1868. 

73. Tiltons Jour, of Hort. 5:335-336. 1869. 
71. Tilton's Jour, of Hort. 7:180. 1870. 

75. Tracy, W. W., Jr. U. S. D. A. Bui. 21:167-182. 1903. 

76. Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 114. 1872. 

77. U. S. D. A. Ann. Rpt. 1850. 350-351. 

78. Vilmorin-Andrieux. Les Plantes Potageres Paris, France. 

1883. 

79. Waugh, F. A. Okla. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 9:21. 1894. 

80. White, W. N. Gardening for the South. Orange Judd, New 

York. 222-226. 1868. 

81. Wickson, E. J. California Vegetables in Garden and Field. 

Pacific Rural Press. San Francisco, Calif. 227-300. 1897. 

82. Wing, Henry H. Neb. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bui. 6:58-59. 1889. 



APPENDIX 
METHODS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



The major descriptions of these crops are based upon 
data very largely obtained from extensive variety trials 
at Geneva during the past five years. The observations 
of Sturtevant and Goff (50) were of considerable value, 
especially in relation to varieties the seed of which is 
no longer obtainable. Numerous visits to seedsmen's 
trial grounds afforded an opportunity not only to see 
varieties grown under varying conditions but also to 
examine trial ground records and type books not other- 
wise obtainable. 

All crops were grown according to the usual com- 
mercial practice, although in most instances the use of 
drill rows instead of hill planting enabled individual 
plants to develop in a more normal manner and afforded 
greater opportunity for the note taker to observe plant 
characteristics. Quantitative characters such as length 
of vine, cotyledon, leaf and fruit, size of flower, weight of 
fruit, etc., were carefully measured. Where significant 
differences were found classes (such as large, small, long, 
short, etc.) were formed and the relative value of each 
class was thus more accurately stated. The terms 
narrow, broad, moderately broad, etc., referring to 
seeds are descriptive of the relative proportion rather 
than the actual measurement, in other words a seed 
nearly as long as broad is called broad, while a seed of 
equal width but three times as long is called narrow. 

The extreme sensitiveness of Cucurbit aceae to 
weather conditions has very largely prevented the 
designation of definite maturity dates for these crops. 
The number of days to maturity for squashes and 
pumpkins, the least variable from season to season, was 
determined by individual judgment after such factors 
as skin color, shell hardness and condition of the vine 
were taken into consideration. Such variation was 
found from year to year in the maturity of muskmelons 
(as determined by degree of stem slip and netting, skin 
color, etc.) that for the purpose of this publication the 
varieties are classified as very early, early, moderately 
early, midseason, moderately late and late, and their 
season compared with that of well known or allied 
varieties. 

In order to compile material on the histories of the 
varieties, it has been necessary to seek information from 
a large number of individuals. This information has 
been freely forthcoming and has greatly facilitated the 
work. The authors are indebted to the Associated Seed 
Growers, New Haven, Connecticut, Jerome B. Rice Seed 
Co., Cambridge, N. Y., Joseph Harris Co., Coldwater, 
N. Y., F. H. Woodruff Seed Co., Milford, Conn., J. C. 
Robinson Seed Co., Waterloo, Nebraska, D. Landreth 
Seed Co., Bristol, Pa., the Ferry-Morse Seed Co., 
Detroit, Michigan and many others, who have cooperated 
to the fullest extent in furnishing information and 
seed for trial. 



The authors extend sincere thanks to individuals in 
the above mentioned organizations, to many others of 
the seed trade and to co-workers of other educational 
and experimental institutions who remain unnamed 
because of lack of space. 

GLOSSARY 

Acorn The more or less prominent, often protuberant 

irregular formation at the apex of the fruit of 

Turban squashes. 

Apical The portion at the distal end; opposite the base. 

Aromatic Possessed of spicy fragrance. 

Auricle The lobe-like portion of the leaf blade, at or near 

the base. 
Basal The portion at the proximal end; opposite the apex 

or tip. 
Blistered The presence of small eruptions and depressions 

over the surface of the leaf or fruit. 
Bumpy When the surface of the fruit is uneven; not 

definitely ribbed and furrowed. 
Button The small protuberance at the blossom end of 

the fruit; the fleshy style. 
Cleft When the sinus extends half way or (somewhat 

more) to the base or midrib and either the sinus 

or the lobe is narrow or acute. 
Color Given in common color terms with the approxi- 
mate Ridgeway term in parenthesis. 

Cordate Heart-shaped. 

Crumpled When blistered formations are large, and excessive 

development of folds is present. 

Cylindrical Elongated, with the cross-section circular. 

Dentate Margin with teeth equal-sided, projecting at 

right angles to the blade. 
Denticulate. . . . Minutely toothed; finely dentate. 

Entire Margin without divisions, lobes or teeth. 

Face The broad side of the seed. 

Falcate-fusiform. Curved spindle-shape. 

Frilled When the border of the leaf is wavy to the 

horizontal. 

Furrows Depressions between the ribs. 

Fusiform Spindle-shaped; thickest at the medial and more 

or less tapering towards both ends. 

Granular When the flesh is coarse and mealy; often gritty. 

Incised When the margin is cut irregularly and sharply. 

Insipid When the flesh of a fruit is tasteless; flat. 

Interstice The area within the mesh of the cork-like netting. 

Lacerate Deeply and irregularly cut along the margin. 

Lobed When the sinus extends not more than half way 

to the base or midrib and either the sinus or lobe 

is rounded. 

Medial The center-most portion. 

Musky When the odor of the melon is more or less strong 

and pungent. 
Nauseous When the odor or taste of a fruit is particularly 

pungent, musky or overly sweet. 
Oblate Distinctly flattened at the ends; compressed 

globose. 
Oblong Considerably longer than broad, with nearly 

parallel sides. 
Obpyriform. . . . Inversely pear-shaped; the larger end at the base. 

Ovate Shaped like an egg, the broader portion at the base. 

Parted When the sinus reaches almost but not quite to 

the base or midrib. 



110 



APPENDIX 



111 



Pedicle The flower stem. 

Periphery The area about the circumference. 

Pock-marked. . . Blotched with shallow indentures irregular in size 
and shape, more or less accentuated by the con- 
trasting color pattern and netted appearance of 
the surrounding tissue. 

Pulpy When the flesh is very coarse and exceedingly 

fibrous. 

Quality Refers to the physical and chemical structure of 

fruit as designating its value as an edible product. 

Reniform Kidney-shaped. 

Reticulate Marked with a raised corky, lace-like netting on 

the exterior surface of the fruit, usually gray in 
color and variable in size and amount. 

Retuse With a shallow notch at the apex. 

Ribs Longitudinal areas more or less extending above 

the surface of the fruit. 



Rind That portion of the fruit enclosing the flesh; 

the epicarp, when more or less soft and tough. 

Sepal The calyx lobe. 

Serrate Margin with sharp teeth that point forward. 

Shell That portion of the fruit enclosing the flesh, the 

epicarp when hard and rigid. 
Sinuate When the marginal line is more deeply waved than 

undulate. 

Sinus A space or recess between two lobes. 

Texture With reference to the structural character of the 

part in question; the degree of coarseness, stringi- 

ness or pulpiness. 
Truncate Terminating abruptly as though the ends were 

cut off; flattened or nearly so, at the ends. 

Turbinate Top-shaped, with the larger end at the base. 

Umbraculiform . Shaped like an umbrella. 

Undulate When the margin is a wavy line bending slightly 

inward and out. 



INDEX 



Abbott, G. W., Rocky Ford, Colo., Var. orig. by, 85 

Abbott & Cobb, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. orig. by, 94 

Acanthosicyos horrida. 6 

Acknowledgments, 110 

Adams, T. Lee, seedsmen, Kansas City, Mo., Var. intr. by, 94 

Aggeler & Musser, seedsmen, Los Angeles, Calif., 56, 75, 104; 

Var. intr. by, 16, 50, 52, 65, 67, 79, 106 
All-American Selections, Cucumbers 95, 96, 106; Muskmelons, 90 
Allen, C. L., 30 
Amordica, 8 
Angaria, 8 

Citrullus, 8 
Apfel, Alfred, — Iowa, Var. orig. by, 67 
Arikara Indian Tribe, 3, 16, 23, 47 
Askutasquash, 3, 48 
Ashworth, George, Locust Valley, Long Island, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 

89 
Associated Seed Growers, New Haven, Conn., Var. intr. by, 35, 96 
Athanase, Rev. Father, Trappist Monastery, La Trappe, Quebec, 

Var. orig. by, 83 

B 

Bailey, L. H., Cornell Univ., Ithaca, N. Y., 4, 65, 75, 93 

Balsam-apple, 7 

Balsam-pear, 7 

Barler, O. L., Alton, 111., Var. intr. by, 82 

Barteldes Seed Co., Lawrence, Kan., Var. intr. by, 95 

Banning, F., Kinsman, Ohio, Var. orig. by, 77 

Bauhin, 4 

Beattie, W. R., U. S. D. A., Washington, D. C, 61 

Beck, Antone, Oregon, 111., Var. orig. by, 67, 89 

Bender, Charles, Albany. N. Y., Var. orig. by, 63 

Benincasa, 6, 8 

cerifera, 8 

cylindrica, 8 

hispid a, 3, 8 

vacua, 8 
Beverley, Robert, 49, 50 
Bidwell, General, Chico, California, 65 
Bird, F. E., Denver, Colo., Var. orig. by, 63 
Blinn, P. K., Rocky Ford, Colo., Var. orig. by, 86, 87 
Bliss, B. K., seedsman, New York, 22, 90, 103, 106 
Bolgiano, F. W. & Co., seedsmen, Washington, D. C, Var. intr. by, 

38 
Bolgiano, J., seedsman, Baltimore, Md., Var. intr. by, 98 
Bottomly, Thos. F., — , Maryland, Var. orig. by, 64 
Bowman, — , Niagara Co., N. Y., Var. orig. by, 71 
Breck, Joseph & Co., seedsmen, Boston, Mass., 20, 47, 52, 83, 86; 

Var. intr. by, 34 
Bridgman, Thomas, 88, 98 

Brown, Alfred J. Seed Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., Var. intr. by, 97 
Bryonia cheirophylla, 8 

Buckbee, H. W., seedsman, Rockford, 111., Var. intr. by, 45, 76 
Buckler gourd, 4 
Bucklers, 4 

Budlong Gardens, Chicago, 111., Var. orig. by, 20 
Burbank, Luther, Santa Rosa, Calif., Var. orig. by, 95, 102 
Burpee, W. Atlee & Co., seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., 42, 45; 

Var. intr. by, 21, 24, 26, 28, 35, 37, 38, 40, 55, 56, 62, 63, 65, 

67, 69, 70, 72, 79, 80, 81, 88, 89, 96, 100, 101, 107 
Burr, Fearing Jr., 4, 15, 18, 28, 31, 33, 36, 39, 41, 45, 46, 48, 50, 53, 

55, 56, 61, 79, 83, 88, 90, 93, 98, 99, 104 
Burrell, D. V., seedsman, Rocky Ford, Colo., 75; Var. intr. by, 

41, 50, 64, 68, 85, 97, 104 
Bushnell, John W., Ohio Exp. Sta., Wooster, Ohio, 25 
Butman, Clarendon, — , Maine, Var. orig. by, 19 



Calabash, 3 

Calabash gourd, 3 

Calabazilla, 11 

Caldwell & Jones, seedsmen, Hartford, Conn., 88 

Calebasses, 53 

Calhoun, Mr. — , Var. orig. by, 51 

Calvin, A., Chicago, 111., Var. orig. by, 65 

Camerarius, 5 

Cantaloupe, 10; varieties, see muskmelons, 61 

Carpenter, Wm. S., New York, Var. orig. by, 90 

Carter, James & Co., seedsmen, London, Eng., 45; Var. intr. by, 38 

Cartier, Jacques, 60, 93 

Cashman Seed Co., Owatonna, Minn., Var. intr. by, 25 

Cassabanana, 10 

Castetter, E. F., Iowa Exp. Sta., Ames, Iowa, 15 



Chayote, 6 

Childs, John Lewis, seedsman, Floral Park, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 89, 

98 
Chinese Preserving Melon, 8 
Chipman, George F., Winnipeg, Canada, 78 
Cimnel, 49 
Citron, 9 
Citronelle, 4 
Citrullus, 6, 8 

aedulis, 9 

amarus, 9 

battich. 8 

caffer, 8 

Caffrorum, 8 

chodospermus, 8 

Citrullus, 9 

colocynthoides, 9 

edulis, 8 

fistulosus, 9 

Pastera, 8 

vulgaris, 3, 5, 8 
citroides, 9 
lanatus, 9 
Coccinia, 6 

Collins, Minton, Richmond, Va., Var. intr. by, 107 
Colocynthis, 8 

Citrullus, 9 
Colorado Seed Co., Denver, Colo., Var. intr. by, 28 
Columbus, Christopher, 60, 93 

Comstock, Ferre, seedsmen, Wethersfield, Conn., 107 
Concombre, 4 
Concombre Arada, 10 

Conrad, J. W., Rockbridge, Ohio, Var. orig. by, 71 
Courge, 4 

Currie Bros., seedsmen, Milwaukee, Wis., 81 
Covalt, W. B., — , Kansas, Var. orig. by, 79 
Cover, Jerre, 80 
Coy, Chauncy P., Waterloo, Nebr., Var. orig. by, 38, 40, 63, 73, 76, 

96, 98, 101 
Crescentia Cujete, 3 
Cucumbers, 

Classifications and Keys, 9, 93 

History, Botanical, 4 

History, Horticultural, 93 

Obscure varieties of, 108 

References for, 109 

Varieties of, 94 
Cucumeroides, 7 
Cucumeropsis, 6 
Cucumis, 3, 4, 7, 9 

acid us, 10 

acutangulus, 8 

amarissimus, 8 

ambigua, 9, 10 

Anguina, 7 

Anguria, 4, 9, 107 

angurioides, 9 

Arada, 9 

aromaticus, 10 

Bardona, 9 

bicirrha, 7 

bucharicus, 10 

Cantalon, 10 

cantalupensis, 10 

Cantalupo, 10 

campechianus, 10 

Chaete, 10 

Chate, 10 

chinensis, 10 

Chito, 10, 104 

cicatrisatus, 10 

Citrullus, 8 

Conomon, 10 

cubensis, 10 

deliciosus, 10 

dipsaceus, 3, footnote 2 , 9, 108 

dissectus, 8 

Dudaim, 10 

echinatus, 9 

eriocarpus, 10 

erivanicus, 10 

esculentus, 9 

flexuosus, 10 

Gurmia, 10 



113 



114 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Cucumis — Continued 
Hardwickii, 9 
intermedius, 7 
jamaicensis, 10 
jucunda, 10 
laciniosus, 8 
lineatus, 8 
maculatus, 10 
maltensis, 10 
metacarpus, 8 
Afe/o, 3, 4, 9, 10 
agrestis, 10 
cultus. 10 
cantalupensis, 10 
Chito, 10 
Conomon, 10 
Dudaim, 10 
flexuosus, 10 
inordorus, 10 

Armenian, 61; Syn. of Persian, 86 

Bidwell Casaba, see Casaba, 65 

Casaba, 10, 61, 63, 75, 80; Var. 64 

Golden Beauty, see Casaba, 65 

Golden Hybrid, 65 

Green Persian, see Casaba, 65 

Honey Dew, 10, 61, 75; Var. 75 

Odessa, see Casaba, 65 

Persian, 10, 61, 65; Var. 86 

Santa Claus, see Casaba, 65 

Turkish, 61; see Persian, 86 

White Antibes Winter, Syn. of Honey Dew, 75 

Winter Pineapple, see Casaba, 65 
reticulatus, 10, var. of, 61 

Abbott's Pearl, Syn. of Pearl Pink Meat, 85 

Abbott's Peerless Pearl, Syn. of Peerless Pearl, 85 

Acme, 60, 62, 64, 71; Var. 61 

Acme Citron, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Admiral Togo, 71; Var. 62 

Alamo Nutmeg, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Albany Market, 91 

All Meat, Syn. of Osage, 84 

All the Year, 91 

Allen's Superb, 62 

Alton Large Nutmeg; Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Ambulance, 91 

American Beauty, Syn. of White Japan, 90 

American Breakfast, 91 

Andalusia, 91 

Angelo, 91 

Anne Arundel, 64; Var. 62 

Aristocrat, Syn. of Golden Combination, 71 

Arizona Nugget, Syn. of McDaniels Nugget, 79 

Arlington, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Arlington Green Fleshed, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Arlington Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Arlington Long Yellow, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 

Arlington Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Armenian, 61; Syn. of Persian, 86 

A. S. & L. Melon, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 

Atlantic City, 62 

Atlantic City Extra Early, Syn. of Atlantic City, 62 

Augusta Market, 91 

Autumn, 91 

Baker, Syn. of Surprise, 89 

Baltimore, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Baltimore Acme, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Baltimore Citron, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Baltimore Market, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Baltimore Musk, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Baltimore Nutmeg, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Baltimore Rough, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Banana, 83, 84; Var. 62 

Banana Citron, Syn. of Banana, 62 

Banquet, 71 ; Var. 62 

Barling's Montana, 63 

Bate's Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Bayview, 61; 111. 62; Var. 63 

Bayview Hybrid, Syn. of Bay View, 63 

Beauty Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Beck's Columbus, Syn. of Columbus, 67 

Beck's Triumph, Syn. of Triumph, 89 

Bender, 60; 111. 63; Var. 63 

Bender's Surprise, Syn. of Bender, 63 

Benton Harbor Gem, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Berkley. 91 

Berry's Favorite, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Bidwell Casaba, see Casaba, 65 

Big Ben, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 

Big Bender, Syn. of Bender, 63 



C. M. reticulatus — Continued 

Big Profit, Syn. of Milwaukee Market, 81 

Bird, 63 

Bittner's Blight Proof, 91 

Black African, 91; see Golden Oval, 72 

Black Jap, 91 

Black Paris, 91 

Black Swedish, 91; see Osage, 84 

Blue Ribbon Gem, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Blue Ribbon Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Borneo, 91 

Boston Large Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Boston Pet, Syn. of Christiana, 66 

Boston Sweet, Syn. of Christiana, 66 

Bottomly, 66; Var. 64 

Bowman's Gold Coin, Syn. of Gold Coin, 71 

Brant, 91 

Breakfast Delight, 91 

Bridgeton Favorite, Syn. of Champion Market, 65 

Brooks Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Buckbee's Ideal, Syn. of Ideal, 76 

Buckbee's No. 555, 91 

Buckner, 91 

Buckskin, Syn. of Pearl Pink Meat, 85 

Buskirk, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Buskirk's Blight Proof, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Burrell's Gem, 61; Var. 64 

Burrell's Netted Gem, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Bush, 64 

California Beauty, 64 

California Cream, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 

California Giant, 91 

California Large Nutmeg, Syn. of California Beauty, 64 

Canadian, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 

Canadian Market, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 

Cannon Ball, Syn. of Cosmopolitan, 67 

Cape, 91 

Cape May, 91 

Captain, 64 

Carbonkel, 91 

Carolina Clark, 91 

Casaba, 10, 61, 63, 75, 80; Var. 64 

Center, 91; see Jenny Lind, 77 

Champion Market, 60; Var. 65 

Champlain, Syn. of Golden Champlain, 71 

Chicago, Syn. of Chicago Market, 65 

Chicago Market, 65 

Chicago Market Nutmeg, Syn. of Chicago Market, 65 

Chicago Nutmeg, Syn. of Chicago Market, 65 

Chipman's Lake Champlain, Syn. of Lake Champlain, 

78 
Christiana, 60, 84, 88; 111. 66: Var. 66 
Christiana Improved, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Christopher Columbus, Syn. of Columbus, 67 
Cincinnati Market, 91 
Citron, 60; Var. 66 
Citron Nutmeg, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Clark, 66 

Colorado, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Colorado Queen, 66 
Columbia, Syn. of Columbus, 67 
Columbus, 89; Var. 67 
Columbus Green, Syn. of Columbus, 67 
Columbus Queen, Syn. of Columbus, 67 
Common Muskmelon, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 
Connecticut Special, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Cooper's Sweetheart; 1937 intr., Kilgore Seed Co., 

Plant City, Fla. 
Coral Reef, 91 
Core, 91 
Corning, 91 

Cosmopolitan, 60, 61; 111. 67; Var. 67 
Cream, 91 

Creole, Syn. of New Orleans Market, 82 
Creole Prize, Syn. of New Orleans Market, 82 
Cuban Banana, Syn. of Banana, 62 
Cuban Castillian. 1937 intr., Kilgore Seed Co., 

Plant City, Fla. 
Cyprus, 91 

Daisy, 67 

Dandy, 91 

Davis Grand, Syn. of Davis, 72 

Dee-licious, 91 

Dee-light, Syn. of Bender, 63 

Defender, 60, 61: Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Delicious, 60; Var. 68 

Delicious Gold Lined, Syn. of Rocky Ford. 87 

Delicious Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 



INDEX 



115 



C. M. reticulatus — Continued 

Delmonico, 85; Var. 68 

Dewey Gem Nutmeg, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Dickman's Best, 91 

Disco Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, SI 

Discovery. Syn. of Golden Champlain, 71 

Dominion Day, 91 

Dominion Green-Fleshed, 91 

Dreamwold, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Dunlop, 91 

Dwarf, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Earliana, Syn. of Golden Champlain, 71 

Earliest, Syn. of Golden Champlain, 71 

Earliest Gem, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Earliest of All. Syn. of Citron, 66 

Earliest Ripe, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Early Atlantic City, Syn. of Atlantic City, 62 

Early Baltimore, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Early Bird, 68 

Early Bristol, 91 

Early Burlington, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Early Christiana, Syn. of Christiana, 66 

Early Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Early Emerald Gem, Syn. of Emerald Gem, 69 

Early Fordhook. Syn. of Fordhook, 70 

Early Golden Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Early Grand Rapids, Syn. of Extra Early Grand 

Rapids, 69 
Early Grand Rapids Market, Syn. of Extra Early 

Grand Rapids, 69 
Early Green Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Early Green Flesh Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Early Green Japanese, 91 

Early Green Nutmeg, 78: Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Early Hackensack, Syn. of Extra Early Hackensack, 69 
Early Honeysweet, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Early Hybrid, 91 

Early Imperial, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Early Improved Christiana, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Early Jenny, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Early Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Early Jersey Hackensack, Syn. of Extra Early Hacken- 
sack, 69 
Early June, 91 

Early Knight, Syn. of Knight, 78 
Early Leader, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 
Early Market, 91 

Early Matchless, Syn. of Matchless, 79 
Early May. Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Early Model, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Early Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Early Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg. 82 
Early Orange Christina, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Early Polignac, 91 
Early Prize, 91 

Early Prolific Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Early Ripe. 78; Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Early Round Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Early Sugar Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Early Surprise, Syn. of Surprise, 89 
Early Sweet Air, Syn. of Knight, 78 
Early Tye, Syn. of Tye, 89 
Early Victor, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Early White Japan, Syn. of White Japan, 90 
Early Wonder, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Early Yellow, 91 

Eden Gem, 60. 68; Syn. of Rocky Ford. 87 
Eden Gem Select, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Edward's Perfecto, 60; Var. 68 
Eighty-eight, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Emerald and Gold, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Emerald Gem, 60, 61, 67, 70, 71, 77, 81; HI. 69; 

Var. 69 
Emerald Green, Syn. of Emerald Gem, 69 
Enid, 111. 68; Var. 69 
Enormous, Syn. of Giant, 70 
Extra Early Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Extra Early Citron Nutmeg, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Extra Early Grand Rapids, 111. 71; Var. 69 
Extra Early Grand Rapids Market, Syn. of Extra 

Early Grand Rapids, 69 
Extra Early Green Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Extra Early Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Extra Early Hackensack, 69 

Extra Early Hale's Best, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Extra Early Hanover. 69 
Extra Early Improved Hackensack, Syn. of Extra 

Early Hackensack, 69 
Extra Early Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 



C. M. reticulatus — ■ Continued 

Extra Early Knight, Syn. of Knight, 78 

Extra Early Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Extra Early Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Extra Early Orange Christiana, Syn. of Christiana, 66 

Extra Early Osage, 70 

Extra Early Osage Gem, Syn. of Extra Early Osage, 70 

Extra Early Prize, 91 

Extra Early Prize Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Extra Early Roof. 91 

Extra Early Round Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 

81 
Extra Eaily Sunrise, 70 

Extra Early Wonder, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Extra Select Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Extra Selected Delicious. Syn. of Delicious, 68 
Extra Selected New Surprise, Syn. of Surprise, 89 

Famous Indiana, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 

Farthest North, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Ferry's New Defender, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Fine Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Fine Netted, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Fine Netted Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Fine Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

First in Market, Syn. of Citron, 66 

First on the Market, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 

Flat Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Fordhook. 60, 61; 111. 70; Var. 70 

Free Lunch, 91 

French Perfection, 91 

Gautier's Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 
Gem, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Gem of Eden, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Genesee Golden Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Giant, 70 

Giant Chicago, Syn. of Chicago Market, 65 
Giant Chicago Market, Syn. of Chicago Market, 65 
Giant Emerald Gem, Syn. of Supreme, 89 
Giant Montreal, Syn. of Montreal Market, SI 
Giant Montreal Market, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Giant of Colorado, Syn. of Bay View, 63 
Giant Wonder Gem, Syn. of Emerald Gem, 69 

Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Globo de Oro, 1936 intr. Rocky Ford Cantaloupe 

Seed Breeders' Assoc, Rocky Ford, Colo. 
Gold Coin. 60; Var. 71 
Gold Dollar, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Gold Fleshed Rocky Ford, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 85 
Gold Lined, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Gold Lined Netted Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 

87 
Gold Lined Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Gold Nugget, 71; Syn. of Admiral Togo, 62 
Gold Winner, 91 
Golden Beauty, see Casaba, 65 
Golden Champion, 1935 intr. Allen, Sterling & 

Lothrop, Portland, Maine 
Golden Champlain, 60, 76; 111. 75; Var. 71 
Golden Combination, 71 
Golden Cream, 72 

Golden Delicious, Syn. of Delicious, 68 
Golden Eagle, 72 

Golden Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Golden Gem Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Golden Heart, Syn. of Oregon Delicious, 84 
Golden Hearted, Syn. of Hearts of Gold, 74 
Golden Hearts, Syn. of Hearts of Gold, 74 
Golden Hybrid, see Casaba, 65 
Golden Ice Cream, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Golden Jenny, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Golden Jersey, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Golden Jewel. 91 

Golden Lake Champlain, Syn. of Golden Champlain, 71 
Golden Marvel, 1937 intr. Gill Bros., Portland, Ore.; 

orig. J. T. Wood, Twin Bluffs, Wis. 
Golden Melodew, Syn. of Melodew, 80 
Golden Netted, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Golden Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Golden Osage, 72 
Golden Oval, 72 

Golden Perfection, Syn. of Hcney Ball, 75 
Golden Pollock, Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 
Golden Prince, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Golden Queen, Syn. of Greeley Wonder, 73 
Golden Rock. 91 
Golden Seal, 91 
Golden Sugar, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 



116 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



C. M. reticulatus — Continued 
Golden Superb, 91 

Golden Treasure, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Golden Triumph, 91 
Golden West, 91 

Golden Wonder, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Good Traveler, 91 
Grand, 72 
Grand Rapids, 60; Syn. of Extra Early Grand Rapids, 

69 
Grand Rapids Market, Syn. of Extra Early Grand 

Rapids, 69 
Grand View, 91 

Granite State, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 
Great Combination, 91 
Greeley Wonder, 73 
Green, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Green and Gold, 91 
Green Citron, 73; Syn. of Citron, 66 
Green Citron Nutmeg, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Green Fleshed, 60; Var. 73 
Green Fleshed Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Green Fleshed Genesee, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Green-Fleshed Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Green Fleshed Osage, 73 

Green Fleshed Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 
Green Fleshed Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Green Fleshed Tip Top, Syn. of Ohio Sugar, 83 
Green Gage, 91 
Green Japan, 91 

Green Meat Pollock No. 25, see Pollock No. 25, 86 
Green Meated Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Green Montreal, 63; Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Green Netted, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Green Netted Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Green Nutmeg, 80; Syn. of Citron, 66 
Green Persian, see Casaba, 65 
Grower's Pride, 91 

Hackensack, 60, 61, 69, 78; Var. 73 

Hackensack Nutmeg, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 

Hale's Best, 60, 90; Var. 73 

H. B., Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 

H. B. No. 9-36, Str. of Hale's Best, 74 

H. B. No. 10, Str. of Hale's Best, 74 

H. B. No. 36, Str. of Hale's Best, 74 

H. B. No. 112, Str. of Hale's Best, 74 

Hamilton Market, 91 

Hart's Victor, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Harute, Syn. of Bender, 63 

Hearts of Gold, 60; Var. 74 

Henderson Bush, Syn. of Bush, 64 

Hollybrook Luscious, 74 

Home Sweet Home, Syn. of Bay View, 63 

Honey, 75 

Honey Ball, 90; Var. 75 

Honey Dew, 10, 61, 75; Var. 75 

Honey Drop, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Honey Drop Improved, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Honey Heart, 91 

Honeymel, Syn. of Melodew, 80 

Honey Net, Syn. of Melodew, 80 

Honey Rock, 60- 111. 75; Var. 75 

Honey Sweet, Syn. of Milwaukee Market, SI 

Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Honfleur, 91 
Hoodoo, 61; Var. 76 
Hoosier, Syn. of Hoosier King, 91 
Hoosier King, 91 
Hoover, 91 
Hope, 91 
Hummer, 76 
Hunter, 91 

Ice King, 91 

Ideal, 76 

Ideal Eden Gem, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Idaho Wonder, 91 

Imperial, Syn. of Weaver Special, 90 

Imperial 50-15. Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 

Imperial Special, Syn. of Weaver Special, 90 

Imperial Sunset, 60: Var. 76 

Improved Arlington Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Improved Burrell's Gem, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Improved Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Improved Citron Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Improved Davis Grand, Syn. of Davis, 72 

Improved Early Hackensack, Syn. of Extra Early 

Hackensack, 69 
Improved Early Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind. 7 7 



M. reticulatus — Continued 

Improved Emerald Gem, Syn. of Emerald Gem, 69 
Improved Green Flesh, Syn. of Green Fleshed, 73 
Improved Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Improved Green Prolific Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Improved Hackensack, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 
Improved Hoo Doo, Syn. of Hearts of Gold, 74 
Improved Jenny, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Improved Jenny Lind, 70; Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Improved Large Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Chicago 

Market, 65 
Improved Large Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Improved Milwaukee Market, Syn. of Milwaukee 

Market, 81 
Improved Montreal Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal 

Market, 81 
Improved Montreal Market, Syn. of Montreal Market, 

81 
Improved Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Improved Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Improved Orange Christiana, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Improved Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Improved Perfecto, Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Improved Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 
Improved Pink Meat, Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Improved Pollock, Syn. of Poliock 10-25, 86 
Improved Prolific Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Improved Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Improved Rust Resistant, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Improved Shipper's Delight, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Improved Tip Top, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 
Improved White Japan, Syn. of White Japan, 90 
Improved Yellow Large Muskmelon, Syn. of Long 

Yellow, 79 
Indiana, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 
Indianapolis Market, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 
Invincible, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Iowa Mastodon, 91 

Iowa Standard, Syn. of Admiral Togo, 62 
Ironclad, 76 

Irondequoit, 60, 75; Var. 77 
Island Beauty, Syn. of Long Island Beauty, 78 
Ivory Wonder, see Golden Oval, 72 

Jackson First Market, 91 

Jade Beauty, 1935 intr. Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed 

Breeders' Assoc, Rocky Ford, Colo., 91 
Japan, Syn. of White Japan, 90 
Japan Coral Flesh, 91 
Japan Rock, 91 

Japan Silver-Striped White, Syn. of White Japan, 90 
Jasper, 91 

Jenny, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Jenny Lind, 61; Var. 77 
Jenny Lind Citron, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Jersey Belle, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Jersey Button, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Jewel, 91 
John Harvey, 91 
Johnson's Big Wonder, 91 
Johnson's Colorado. Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Johnson's Ringleader, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Juicy Fruit, Syn. of Bender, 63 
Jumbo Pink, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Jumbo Pink Meat, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Junior Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Kinsman Queen, 60; 111. 74; Var. 77 

Klondike, 91 

Knight, 60; 111. 78; Var. 78 

Knight's Early Maryland, Syn. of Acme, 61 

Krokee, 91 

Lake Champlain, 71: Var. 78 
Large Acme, Syn. of Acme, 61 
Large African, 91 

Large Baltimore, Syn. of Acme, 61 
Large Cantaloupe, 91 

Large Early Hackensack, Syn. of Extra Early Hacken- 
sack, 69 
Large Green Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 
Large Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Large Hackensack, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 
Large Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind. 
Large Late Hackensack, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 
Large Mexican, 91 

Large Montreal Market, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Large Musk, 91 
Large Netted, 91 
Large Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 



INDEX 



117 



C. M. reticulatus — -Continued 

Large Round Yellow, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 

Large Sweet Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 

Large Yellow, 91 

Late Hackensack, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 

Lewis Good Traveler, Syn. of Lewis Perfection, 78 

Lewis Perfection, 78 

Little Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Livingston's Market, 78 

Livingston's Market Nutmeg, Syn. of Livingston's 

Market, 78 
Lone Star, 78 

Long Island Beauty, 60; Var. 78 
Long John, 79 

Long Orange, Syn. of Long Yellow, 79 
Long Yellow, 60, 61; Var. 79 
Los Angeles Market, 79 

Lybbert's New. intr. 1936, Porter-Walton, Salt Lake 
City, Utah 

Magnificent, 91 

Malta, 91 

Mammoth Black Oak, see Golden Oval, 72 

Mammoth Giant, Syn. of Giant, 70 

Mammoth Golden Globe, Str. of Globo de Oro, 

1936 intr. Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed Breeders' 

Assoc, Rocky Ford, Colo. 
Mammoth Montreal, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Mammoth Montreal Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal 

Market, 81 
Mammoth Perfection, Syn. of Perfection, 86 
Mammoth Prolific, 91 

Mammoth Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Market, Syn. of Livingston's Market, 78 
Market King, Syn. of Giant, 70 
Market Nutmeg, Syn. of Livingston's Market, 78 
Mary, 91 

Mary Daisy, Syn. of Emerald Gem, 69 
Maryland, Syn. of Knight, 78 
Masterpiece, Syn. of Melodew, 80 
Matchless, 79 

Mayview Favorite, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 
Maize Market Garden, 91 
McCotter's Pride, 111. 79; Var. 79 
McDaniel's Nugget, 79 
Melbourne Market, 91 
Melobite, 91 
Melodew, 60; Var. 80 
Melrose, 80 

Melting Gold, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Melting Sugar, Syn. of Acme, 61 
Memphis Market, 91 
Mexican Banana, Syn. of Banana, 62 
Mexican Yellow Netted, 91 
Michell's Delicious, Syn. of Giant, 70 
Miller's Cream, 60, 61, 84; Var. 80 
" Miller's Cream ", Used as a Syn. of Osage, 84 
Miller's Cream Nutmeg. Syn. of Miller's Cream, 80 
Miller's Cream Osage, Syn. of Miller's Cream, 80 
Miller's Hybrid, Syn. of Miller's Cream, 80 
Millionaire, 80 

Mill's Earliest, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Mill's Famous, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Mill's Giant, Syn. of Giant, 70 
Milwaukee Market, 81 

Minnesota Melting Sugar, Syn. of Ohio Sugar, 83 
Minnesota Perfection, Syn. of Perfection, 86 
Minorca, 91 

Mission Bell, Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 
Missionary Belle, Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 
Missouri, 81 

Missouri Nutmeg, Syn. of Missouri, 81 
Model, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Money Maker, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Montreal, 61: Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Montreal Beauty. Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Montreal Green, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Montreal Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Montreal Improved Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal 

Market, 81 
Montreal Large Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal 

Market, 81 
Montreal Market, 61, 65, 83; Var. 81 
Montreal Market Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal Market, 

81 
Montreal Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 
Moscatello, 91 

Mosley Tip Top. Syn. of Tip Top, 89 
Mountain Top, 91 
Murray's Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 



M. reticulatus — Continued 

Nebraska Gold Lined, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Nectar of Angels, 91 

Netted, 10, 91 

Netted Beauty, 81 

Netted Cantaloupe, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Netted Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Netted Gem, 60, 61, 74, 75, 78, 85, 86; Var. 81 

Netted Green Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Netted Green Fleshed, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Netted Nugget, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 

Netted Nutmeg, 66; Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 

Netted Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Netted Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 

Netted Rock, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Netted Rock King, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Netted Tip Top, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 

New Arizona, Syn. of Hearts of Gold, 74 

New Arundel, Syn. of Knight, 78 

New Banquet, Syn. of Banquet, 62 

New Early Hackensack, Syn. of Extra Early Hacker. 

sack, 69 
New Early Victor, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
New England Hackensack, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 
New Extra Early Knight, Syn. of Knight, 78 
New Fordhook, Syn. of Fordhook, 70 
New Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
New Giant, Syn. of Giant, 70 
New Gold, 91 

New Golden Osage, Syn. of Golden Osage, 72 
New Grand Rapids, Syn. of Extra Early Grand 

Rapids, 69 
New Green Fleshed, 91 
New Honey, Syn. of Honey, 75 
New Hybrid, 91 

New Ideal, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
New Knight Cantaloupe, Syn. of Knight, 78 
New Maryland, Syn. of Knight, 78 
New Mellobite, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
New Melrose, Syn. of Melrose, 80 
New Orange Cream, Syn. of Osage, 84 
New Orleans, Syn. of New Orleans Market, 82 
New Orleans Market, 82 
New Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 
New Osage Gem, Syn. of Osage, 84 
New Perfect Leader, Syn. of Golden Queen, 73 
New Princes, Syn. of Perfection, 86 

Syn. of Miller's Cream, 80 
New Rival, 91 
New South, 91 

New Sugar Rock, Syn. of Honey Rock, 75 
New Superior, Syn. of Superior, 89 
New Surprise, Syn. of Surprise, 89 
New Surprise Gem, 91 
New Tip Top, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 
New Tip Top Nutmeg, Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 
New Triumph, Syn. of Triumph, 89 
New Victory, 91 

New White Japan, Syn. of White Japan, 90 
Newport, 82 
Nixon, 82 

Norfolk Button, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
North Dakota, 91 
Northern Giant, 91 

Nutmeg, 10, 60, 61, 78, 80, 81; Var. 82 
Nutmeg Tip Top, Syn. of Tip Top, 89 

Oblong Hoo Doo, Syn. of Hoo Doo, 76 
Oblong Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Odessa, see Casaba, 65 
Ohio Sugar, 83 
Oka, 83 

Oklahoma, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
O. K. Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
One Hundred One " 101 " Special, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Onondaga, 91 

Orange Christiana, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Orange Cream, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Orange Flesh, Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Orange Flesh Perfecto, Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Orange Flesh Pollock, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 
Orange Flesh Superba, Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Orange Fleshed Christiana, Syn. of Christiana, 66 
Orange Fleshed Rocky Ford, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 
Ordway Cantaloupe, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Ordway Gem, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Ordway Pink, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Ordway Pink Meat, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Ordway Queen, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Syn. of Hoo Doo, 76 



118 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



C. M. reticulatus — Continued 

Oregon Delicious, 84 

Osage, 60, 61, 64, 72, 74, 80, 85, 89; Var. 84 

Osage Blue Ribbon, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Osage Early, Syn. of Extra Early Osage, 70 

Osage Gem, Syn. of Paul Rose, 85 

Osage Orange Flesh, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Osage Red-Fleshed, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Osage Salmon Fleshed, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Osage Select, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Our Own, 91 

Outremont Beauty, 91 

Oval Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Oval Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Page's Early, 84 

Parker's Extra Early, 91 

Park's Delight, 91 

Paul Rose, 60, 64, 78; Var. 85 

Pearl Pink, Syn. of Pearl Pink Meat, 85 

Pearl Pink Meat, 85 

Pearly Pink, Syn. of Pearl Pink Meat, 85 

Peerless Pearl, 60; Var. 85 

Perfect, see Golden Oval, 72 

Perfect Beauty, 91 

Perfect Gem, 91 

Perfect Leader, Syn. of Greeley Wonder, 73 

Perfected Delmonico. 68; Var. 85 

Perfected Perfecto, Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 

Perfected Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Perfection, 86 

Perfection Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Perfection Montreal, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 

Perfection Montreal Nutmeg, Syn. of Montreal 

Market, 81 
Perfection Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Perfecto, 79; Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Perry's New Hoodoo, Syn. of Hearts of Gold, 74 
Persian, 10, 65; Var. 86 
Petosky, Syn. of Paul Rose, 85 
Pfister, Syn. of Milwaukee Market, 81 
Pineapple, 60; Var. 86 
Pineapple Citron, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 
Pineapple Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Pink Flesh, Syn. of BurreH's Gem, 64 
Pink Fleshed Rocky Ford, Syn. of Pollock, No. 25, 86 
Pink Meat, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 
Pink Meat Netted Rock, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 
Pink Meated Rocky Ford, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 
Pink Pearl, Syn. of Pearl Pink Meat, 85 
Pink Queen, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Pollock, 61; Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 
Pollock No. 25, 60; Var. 86 
Pollock Pink, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 
Pollock Rocky Ford, Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 
Pollock 10-25, 60, 72; Var. 86 
Portales Gem, 91 

Premium Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Pride of Wisconsin, 1937 intr. Robt. Buist Co., 

Philadelphia, Pa. 
Princess, Syn. of Perfection, 86 
Prize, 91 

Prize Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Prizetaker, Syn. of Hale's Best, 73 
Prolific Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Prolific Netted, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Prolific Netted Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Prolific Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Prospero, 91 

Quality King, 91 

Queen, 91 

Queen of Gems, Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 

Rajah, 91 

Red Rocky Ford, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Reedland Giant, 87 

Reedland's Giant Citron, Syn. of Reedland Giant, 87 

Remer's Cross, 91 

Reuters Wonder, Syn. of Golden Queen, 73 

Rittenhouse Special, 87 

Rival, Syn. of Knight, 78 

Roberts, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Robinson's Delicious, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Rock Citron, Syn. of Citron, 66 

Rock King, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Rocky Dew, 87 

Rocky Ford, 61, 64: Var. 87 

Rocky Ford Gem, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Rocky Ford Netted Gem, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Rocky Ford Nutmeg, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 



C M. reticulatus — Continued 

Rocky Ford Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 86 

Rocky Ford Pink Meat, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 

Rocky Ford Rust Resistant, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Rocky Ford Selected, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Romana, 91 

Rose Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Round Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Round Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 

Round Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 

Round Yellow, 91 

Runyon, 91 

Rust Proof Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Rust Resistant Pollock, Syn. of Pollock 10-25, 86 

St. Louis Market, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 

Salmon and Green, 91 

Salmon Fleshed Eden Gem, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 

Salmon Fleshed, Syn. of Burrell's Gem, 64 

Salmon Fleshed Gem, Syn. of Paul Rose, 85 

Salmon Fleshed Genesee, Syn. of Paul Rose, 85 

Salmon Fleshed Netted Gem, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 

Salmon Fleshed Rocky Ford, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 

Salmon Giant, Syn. of Giant, 70 

Salmon King, 91 

Salmon Tinted Pollock 10-25, see Pollock 10-25, 86 

Salmon Tinted Pollock, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 86 

Salmon Tinted Pollock No. 25, Syn. of Pollock No. 25, 

86 
Santa Claus, see Casaba, 65 
Satisfaction, 91 

Schramm, Syn. of Bottomly, 64 
Seed Breeders, Str. of Hale's Best, 74 
Select Solid Net, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Selected A- 1 , Syn. of Osage, 84 
Selected New Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 
Shipper's Delight, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Shipper's Pride, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Shumway's Giant, 72; Syn. of Giant, 70 
Shumway's Silver Netted, see Silver Netted, 88 
Siam Netted, 91 
Sibley's Best, 91 
Sill's, Syn. of Sill's Hybrid, 88 
Sill's Hybrid, 60, 80, 89; Var. 88 
Silver Netted, 88 

" Silver Netted", Used as a syn. of Cosmopolitan, 67 
Silver Netted Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Six Oaks, 88 

Skagit Golden, Syn. of Golden Champlain, 71 
Skillman, Syn. of Skillman's Netted, 88 
Skillman's Early, Syn. of Skillman's Netted, 88 
Skillman's Fine Netted, Syn. of Skillman's Netted, 88 
Skillman's Green, Syn. of Skillman's Netted, 88 
Skillman's Netted, 60; Var. 88 

Skillman's Netted Gem, Syn. of Skillman's Netted, 88 
Skillman's Netted Nutmeg, Syn. of Skillman's Netted, 

88 
Skinner's Netted, 91 

Small Green Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Small Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Small Yellow, 91 
Smith's Earliest, 91 
Solid Rock, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Solomon Giant, 91, see Golden Oval, 72 
Sonderegger's Earliest, Syn. of Fordhook, 70 
South Jersey, 91 
Southern Beauty, 88 
Special Imperial White Melon, Syn. of Weaver Special, 

90 
Speer, see Oregon Delicious, 84 
Spicy, 88 
Star, 91 

Starn's Favorite, Syn. of Champion Market, 65 
Strawberry, 91 

Sugar Nutmeg, Syn. of Nutmeg, 82 
Sugar Rock, Syn. of Honey Rock, 75 
Sugar Sweet, Syn. of Knight, 78 
Sunkist, Syn. of Weaver Special, 90 
Superb, 91 

Superba, Syn. of Honey Rock, 75 
Superfecto, 60; Syn. of Edward's Perfecto, 68 
Superior, 89 
Supreme, 89 
Surprise, 60, 81; Var. 89 
Sweet Air, 61 ; Syn. of Knight, 78 
Sweet Home, Syn. of Bay View, 63 
Sweet Martha, Syn. of Fordhook, 70 
Sweetmeat, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Sydney Market, 91 
Syracuse, 91 



INDEX 



119 



C. M. reticulatus — Continued 
Table Queen, 91 
Telephone, Syn. of Surprise, 89 
Ten to One, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Ten Twenty-five, Syn. of Pollock, 10-25, 86 
Texas Belle, 91 

Texas Cannonball, 75; Syn. of Cosmopolitan, 67 
Texas Honey Ball, Syn. of Honey Ball, 75 
The Nugget, 91 

The Princess, Syn. of Perfection, 86 
Thomas Hybrid, Syn. of Milwaukee Market, 81 
Thorburn's Giant, Syn. of Giant, 70 
Ticonderoga, 91 

Tip Top, 60, 61, 67, 71; Var. 89 
" Tip Top", Used as a Syn. of Irondequoit, 77 
Toledo Early Market, 91 
Tom Thumb, 91 
Triangle, 91 
Triumph, 89 

Triumph Hybrid, Syn. of Triumph, 89 
True Jenny Lind, Syn. of Jenny Lind, 77 
Turkish, 61 ; see Persian, 86 
Turk's Cap, Syn. of Hackensack, 73 
Twenty Day, 91 
Tye, 89 

Ulter, 91 

Unequalled Gem, Syn. of Netted Gem, 81 
Unsurpassed, Syn. of Golden Queen, 73 
Utter, Syn. of Milwaukee Market, 81 

Vadco, 91 

Valparaiso, 91 

Van Buskirk Netted King. Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Van Buskirk's Netted Rock, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Vasburg. 91 

Victor, Syn. of Knight, 78 

Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Victory, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 
Vineless, Syn. of Bush, 64 
Vineless Jenny Lind, Syn. of Bush, 64 

Waldorf, 91 

Ward's Ideal, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Ward's Nectar, 90 

Washington Market, Syn. of Montreal Market, 81 

Watter's Solid Net, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Watter's Solid Net Rocky Ford, Syn. of Rocky Ford, 87 

Wayside Market, 91 

Weaver Special, 60: Var. 90 

Western Giant, Syn. of Giant, 70 

White Antibes Winter, Syn. of Honey Dew, 75 

White Seeded Delicious, Syn. of Honey Rock, 75 

Wilson's Black, 91; see Go'lden Oval, 72 

White Japan, 60, 77, 88, 89: Var. 90 

White Japanese, Syn. of White Japan, 90 

White Knight, 1936 intr. Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed 

Breeders' Assoc, Rocky Ford, Colo. 91 
Winter Pineapple, see Casaba, 65 
Wood's Nectar, 91 
Woodworth, 91 

Yamhill Giant, 91 

Yellow Fleshed Columbus, 67 

Yellow Fleshed Japan, Syn. of White Japan, 90 

Yellow Fleshed Jenny Lind, Syn. of Fordhook, 70 

Yellow Fleshed Osage, Syn. of Osage, 84 

Yellow Fleshed Perfection, Syn. of Perfection, 86 

Yellow Meated Japan, Syn. of White Japan, 90 

Yellow-meated Prize, Syn. of Hearts of Gold, 74 

Young's Selected Surprise, Syn. of Surprise, 89 

Yuma Nugget, Syn. of McDaniels Nugget, 79 

Momordica, 10 
moschatus, 10 
muricatus, 9 
odoratissimus, 10 
officinarum, 10 
Pancherianus, 10 
parviflorus, 9 
pedatifidus, 10 
pentandrus, 8 
perennis, 11 
persicodorus, 10 
persicus, 10 
picrocarpus, 10 
pictus, 10 
princeps, 10 
pubescens, 10 
Rapallito, 13 



Cucumis — Continued 
reflexus, 10 
Reginae. 10 
reticulatus, 10 
saccharinus, 10 
sativus, 4, 9 

A and C, 93; Var. 94 

Ace, Syn. of A and C, 94 

Abundance, 94 

Achievement, 108 

Adams, 93; Var. 94 

Adams Forcing, 108 

African Horned, 108 

Ak-sar-ben, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Alaska, 108 

Albino, Syn. of White Wonder, 107 

Aldon White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

All-the-Year-Round, see Tailby's Hybrid, 106 

American Gherkin, see Boston Pickling, 95 

Apple Shaped, Syn. of Lemon, 104 

Arctic White, 108 

Arlington, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Arlington Early White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White 
Spine, 94 

Arlington Famous White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White 
Spine, 94 

Arlington Improved, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Arlington White Spine, 93, 99, 101, 107; 111. 94; Var. 94 

Arlington White Spine Forcing, 108; see Arlington White 
Spine, 94 

Astonisher, 108 

Astro, 108 

Athenian, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 

Athens, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 

Aviator, 108 

Baltimore White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Barteldes, 93; Var. 95 

Bennett's White Spine, see Arlington White Spine, 94 

Bismarck, Syn. of Tailby's Hybrid, 106 

Black Beauty, 108 

Black Diamond, Syn. of Kirby, 103 

Bloomsdale Perfected White Spine, Syn. of Arlington 

White Spine, 94 
Blue Ribbon Improved White Spine, Syn. of Arlington 

White Spine, 94 
Bollwinkle's North Carolina Strain, see Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Bosowskian, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 
Boston Forcing White Spine, 108; see Arlington White 



Spine, 94 
Boston Market, 
Boston Market 

Spine, 108; 



108 



Forcing, Syn. of Boston Forcing White 
see Arlington White Spine, 94 
Boston Pickle, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 
Boston Pickling, 93; 111. 100; Var. 95 
Breck's Forcing White Spine, 108; see Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Brewster's Millions, 108 
Brown Netted, Syn. of Khiva, 103 
Burbank's Iceland, Syn. of Iceland, 102 
Burr, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 
Burrell's Earliest of All, Syn. of Earliest of All, 97 
Burrell's Pickling, 108 

California Gem, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

California Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 

California Pickling, 108 

Capital, 111. 99; Var. 95 

Century, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 

Challenge, Syn. of Davis Perfect, 97 

Champion Pickler, 108 

Chesterfield, 108 

Chicago, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 

Chicago Giant, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Chicago Pickling, 93, 102, 106; Var. 95 

China, Syn. of China Long, 95 

China Long, 95 

Chinese, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Chinese Evergreen, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Chinese Long Green, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Chinese Long-Remaining Green, 95; Syn. of Chinese Three 

Feet, 96 
Chinese Snake, Syn. of Chinese Three Feet, 96 
Chinese Three Feet, 95; Var. 96 
Cincinnati Pickle, 108 
Clark's Special, 96 

Cliffwood Longfellow, Syn. of Longfellow, 104 
Climax, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
Climbing, Syn. of Chinese Three Feet, 96 



120 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



C. sativus — Continued 

Climbing, Syn. of African Horned, 108 

Climbing China, Syn. of Chinese Three Feet, 96 

Climbing Delicatessen, 108 

Cluster, Syn. of Early Cluster, 98 

Colorado, 93; Var. 96 

Colorite, 108 

Common, 93 

Common Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 

Common Rough Green Pickling, 96 

Cool & Crisp, 93, 101: Var. 96 

Cream City Pickle, 108 

Crescent, 108 

Crisp and Cool, Syn. of Cool & Crisp, 96 

Crystal Apple, 96 

Crystal Springs, Syn. of Arlington White Spine. 94 

Cumberland, 111. 95, 96; Var. 96 

Cyclone, Syn. of Early Cyclone, 98 

Cynosure, 108 

D. & B. Special, Syn. of Kirby, 103 

Danish Pickling, 97 

Dark Green, Syn. of Kirby. 103 

Dark Green Arlington, Bunting Strain, see Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Dark Green Slicer, Syn. of Kirby, 103 
Davis Perfect, 93, 94, 98: 111. 106; Var. 97 
Davis Perfect " Select," Syn. of Davis Perfect, 97 
Davis Perfection, Syn. of Davis Perfect, 97 
Deltus, 97 

Diamond Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Double Yield Pickle, 93; Var. 97 

Earliest, 108 

Earliest, 108 

Earliest Black Diamond, Syn. of Kirby, 103 

Earliest Everbearing, Syn. of Everbearing, 100 

Earliest of All, 97 

Earliest White Spine, Syn. of Earliest of All, 97 

Early Beauty, 98 

Early Boston Market, Syn. of Boston Market, 108 

Early Chinese, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Early Cluster, 94; Var. 98 

Early Cluster Prickley, Syn. of Early Cluster, 98 

Early Cyclone, 111. 95; Var. 98 

Early Evergreen, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 

Early Express, Syn. of Early Beauty, 98 

Early Florida, Arlington White Spine, 94 

Early Forcing White Spine, 108; see Early White Spine. 99 

Early Fordhook White Spine, Syn. of Fordhook Famous, 

100 
Early Fortune, 93; 111. 94; Var. 98 
Early Frame, 94; 111. 97; Var. 98 
Early Frame Short Green, Syn. of Early Frame, 98 
Early Giant, 108 

Early Green Cluster, Syn. of Early Cluster, 98 
Early Green Hill, 108 

Early Green Prolific, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 
Early Green Table, 108 

Early Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Early Long Pickling, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Early Long White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 
Early Market, 108 
Early Marvel, 108 

Early Netted Russian, Syn. of Khiva, 103 
Early Perfection White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Early Prize, 108 

Early Prolific Short Green, Syn. of Early Frame. 98 
Early Prolific White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine. 

94 
Early Russian, 94, 100, 106; Var. 99 
Early Russian Gherkin, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 
Early Short Green. Syn. of Early Frame, 98 
Early Short Green Prickley, Syn. of Early Short Prickley, 99 
Early Short Prickley, 93; Var. 99 
Early Short Prolific, Syn. of Early Frame, 98 
Early Short White Prickley, see Early Short Prickley, 99 
Early Siberian, Syn. of Siberian. 106 
Early Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
Early White, 99 
Early White Spine, 99 
Early Wonder, 108 
Early Yellow Dutch, 99 
Elite Pickling. 108 
Emerald, 93, 104; Var. 99 

Emerald Green White Spine, Syn. of Emerald. 99 
Emerald King, 108 
English Hybrid White Spine, 108 
Eskimo, 108 



C. sativus — Continued 

Eskimoso, Syn. of Eskimo, 108 

Everbearing, 93: Var. 100 

Evergreen, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 

Evergreen Early White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen White 

Spine, 100 
Evergreen Pickling, 108 
Evergreen White Spine, 93; Var. 100 
Everlasting, Syn. of Klondike, 104 
Excelsior, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Excelsior Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Express Extra Early, Syn. of Early Beauty, 98 
Extra Early Arlington White Spine, Syn. of Arlington 

White Spine, 94 
Extra Early Conqueror, 108 
Extra Early Eskimoso, Syn. of Eskimo, 108 
Extra Early Evergreen White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen 

White Spine, 100 
Extra Early Frame, Syn. of Early Frame, 98 
Extra Early Green Prolific, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 
Extra Early Green Turkey, Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 104 
Extra Early Klondike, Syn. of Klondike, 104 
Extra Early Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Extra Early Prolific, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 
Extra Early Russian, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 
Extra Early Siberian, Syn. of Siberian, 106 
Extra Early White Spine. Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
Extra Green Prolific Pickling, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 
Extra Long, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 
Extra Long Evergreen, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 
Extra Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Extra Long Green Pickling, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Extra Long Green Prolific, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 
Extra Long Green Smooth, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 
Extra Long Smooth, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 
Extra Long White, Syn. of White German, 107 
Extra Long White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 

111. 98; Var. 100 
Extra Select White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
Extraordinary White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 

Fairfield Giant, Syn of Longfellow, 104 

Famous, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Famous Nugreen, 108 

Famous Peerless, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 

Famous White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Fancy Pickle, Syn. of Snow's Pickling, 106 

Fancy Pickling, Syn. of Snow's Pickling, 106 

Favorite Pickling, 108 

Fejina, 108 

First Crop, Syn. of Earliest of All. 97 

First of All, Syn. of Earliest of All, 97 

Fisk's White Spine, see Hescrow, 102 

Flanigan's Prize, 108 

Florida, see Arlington White Spine, 94 

Florida Emerald, Syn. of Emerald, 99 

Florida Green, Syn. of Emerald, 99 

Fojin, 100 

Forcing White Spine, see Early White Spine, 99 

Fordhook, Syn. of Fordhook Pickling, 101 

Fordhook Famous, 100 

Fordhook Fancy, Syn. of Fordhook Famous, 100 

Fordhook Pickling, 101 

Fordhook White Spine, Syn. of Fordhook Famous, 100 

Forty Day, Syn. of Earliest of All, 97 

Fushinari, 101 

Garden Gem, 108 

Garden Lemon, Syn. of Lemon, 104 

Gem Prolific, 108 

General Grant, 108 

Geneva, 101 

Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

Giant German, 108 

Giant King, 108 

Giant Pera, 101 

Giant Tailby Hybrid, Syn. of Tailby's Hybrid. 106 

Giant White, Syn. of White German, 107 

Gladiator, 108 

Golden Harvest, 108 

Gould's Pickling. 108 

Graham White, 108 

Grand Pera. Syn. of Giant Pera. 101 

Grand Rapids Forcing, 108 

Great Giant, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Grecian, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 

Greenbac, 108 

Green Cluster, Syn. of Early Cluster. 98 

Green Foumier, 108 

Green Giant Forcing, 108 



INDEX 



121 



C. sativus — Continued 

Green Long Gladiator, Syn. of Gladiator, 108 

Green Mountain, 108 

Green Pack, Syn. of Kirby, 103 

Green Prolific, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Green Prolific Pickling, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Green Turkey, Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 104 

Greys A-l. 108 

Grow Quick, 102 

Half Long, 108 

Htinz's Pickle. 108 

Henderson's Perfected, 93; Var. 102 

Hescrow, 102 

Highest Quality, 102 

Hill's Forcing White Spine, 108 

Hoke's White, 108 

Holmes Perfect, 108 

Howard, 108 

Hybrid White Spine, 108 

Iceland, 95: Var. 102 

Ideal Market, 108 

Ideal White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Imperator, Syn. of Clark's Special, 96 

Imperial, Syn. of Fordhook Famous, 100 

Improved Arlington, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

Improved Arlington White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Improved Baltimore White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Improved Bismarck, Syn. of Tailby's Hybrid, 106 
Improved Bourbonne, Syn. of Parisian Pickle, 105 
Improved Chicago Pickle, Syn. of Chicago Pickling, 95 
Improved Early Green Cluster, Syn. of Early Cluster, 98 
Improved Early Long White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen 

White Spine, 100 
Improved Early Russian, Syn. of Early Russian. 99 
Improved Early White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White 

Spine, 94 
Improved Extra Early Arlington White Spine, Syn. of 

Arlington White Spine, 94 
Improved Extra Early Green Prolific, Syn. of Boston 

Pickling, 95 
Improved Extra Early White Spine, Syn. of Arlington 

White Spine, 94 
Improved Extra Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long 

Green, 102 
Improved Extra Long Green Turkey, Syn. of Long Green 

Turkey, 104 
Improved Jersey Pickle. Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Improved Long Green, 102 

Improved Long Green Pickling, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Improved Special Strain Long Green, Syn. of Improved 

Long Green, 102 
Improved White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
Incomparable, 108 
Indianapolis Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 

102 
Infallible, 108 
International, 108 
Iowa Standard, 108 
Irish Queen, 111. 96; Var. 103 
Irondequoit Hothouse, 108 
Ivory King, Syn. of White Wonder, 107 
Ivory Monarch, 108 

Jack Frost, Syn. of White Wonder, 107 

Japan Climbing, Syn. of Japanese Climbing, 103 

Japan Dark Green, Syn. of Japanese Climbing, 103 

Japan Dark Green Cue. Syn. of Chinese Three Feet, 96 

Japanese, Syn. of Japanese Climbing, 103 

Japanese Climbing, 103 

Japanese Climbing Green, Syn. of Japanese Climbing, 103 

Japanese Climbing White, 108 

Japanese Crystal Wax, 108 

Japanese Dark Green, Syn. of Chinese Three Feet, 96 

Jersey Extra Early Prolific Pickle, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 

103 
Jersey Pickle, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Jersey Pickling, 103 

Jersey Pride, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Jerusalem Pickle, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 
Jewel, 108 
Jumbo, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Khiva, 103 

Khiva Netted, Syn. of Khiva, 103 

Kilgore's Dark Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 
102 



C. sariVus — Continued 

King of Picklers, 108 

Kirby, 103 

Kirby 's Stays Green, Syn. of Kirby, 103 

Klondike, 93; Var. 104 

Klondike Long White Spine. Syn. of Klondike, 104 

Klondike White Spine, Syn. of Klondike, 104 

Lago Nu-green, Syn. of Clark's Special, 96 

Land and Water, 108 

Landreth First, Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 104 

Landreth's First Early, Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 104 

Landreth Long Slim, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 

Landreth's Long Slim Pickle, Syn. of Improved Long 

Green, 102 
Landreth's White Slicing, Syn. of White Wonder, 107 
Large Early Market, 108 
Lemon, 10, 95, 102; 111. 99; Var. 104 
Leonard's Greenhouse, 108 
Lilly's Pickling, 108 

London, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
London Extra Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 

102 
London Long Green, 93; Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
London Pickler, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Long China, Syn. of China Long, 95 
Longcu, 108 
Long Evergreen White Spme, Syn. of Evergreen White 

Spine, 100 
Long Gem, 108 
Long German, 108 

Long Giant Pera, Syn. of Giant Pera, 101 
Long Grecian, 104 

Long Green, 94; Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Long Green China, Syn. of China Long, 95 
Long Green Chinese, Syn. of China Long, 95 
Long Green Common, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Long Green English, 93, 94 

Long Green Giant Pera, Syn. of Giant Pera, 101 
Long Green Parisian, Syn. of Parisian Pickle, 105 
Long Green Prickley, 93; see Early White Spine, 99 
Long Green Smooth, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 
Long Green Turkey, 93, 102; Var. 104 
Long Island Pickling, 108 

Long London Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Long Netted Russian, Syn. of Khiva. 103 
Long Parisian, Syn. of Parisian Pickle, 105 
Long Slim, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 
Long Smooth Green Turkey, Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 

104 
Long Smooth White Turkey, see White German, 107 
Long Snow White, 95, 102; Syn. of White German, 107 
Long Spanish, 108 

Long Turkey, 93; Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 104 
Long Turkish, 108 

Long White, Syn. of White German, 107 
Long White Prickley, 93 
Long White Turkey, 93 
Longfellow, 93; Var. 104 
Longest of All, 108 

Majestic, 108 

Mammoth Giant Pera, Syn. of Giant Pera, 101 

Mammoth Long, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 

Mandarin, Syn. of Fojin, 100 

Martin's Pickling, 108 

Mature Cucumber fruits. 111. 104 

Medium Green, Syn. of Nichol's Medium Green, 105 

Medium Pickling, Syn. of Nichol's Medium Green, 105 

Mill's Earliest, Syn. of Earliest of All, 97 

Mill's Hybrid Wonder, 108 

Milwaukee Forcing, 108 

Milwaukee Long Green, Syn. of Improved Long Green, 102 

Milwaukee Pickle, 108 

Mimms New, 108 

Monarch, Syn. of Early White Spine. 99 

Monarch White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 

Money Maker, 108 

Moromian, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 

Moromian Gherkin, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 

Mountain Perfection 104 

Muscatine Pickling, 105 

Muscovic, 108 

Napoleon III, 108 

National Association Pickling, Syn. of National Pickle, 105 

National Pickle, 93; 111. 100; Var. 105 

Needle-Gun, 108 

Nepal, 108 

Netted Russian, Syn. of Khiva, 103 



122 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



C. sativas — Continued 

New Arlington White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 

94 
New Century, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 
New Cumberland, Syn. of Cumberland, 96 
New Early Fojin, Syn. of Fojin, 100 
New England, Syn. of Irish Queen, 103 
New Everbearing, Syn. of Everbearing, 100 
New Evergreen, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 
New Evergreen White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen White 

Spine, 100 
New Fordhook Pickling, Syn. of Fordhook Pickling, 101 
New Giant Pera, Syn. of Giant Pera, 101 
New Giant White, Syn. of White German, 107 
New Grand Forcing, 108 

New Hybrid Spine, Syn. of Woodruff Hybrid, 107 
New Japanese Climbing, Syn. of Japanese Climbing, 103 
New Jersey Hybrid, 108 
New Klondike, Syn. of Klondike, 104 
New Long Grecian, Syn. of Long Grecian, 104 
New Longfellow. Syn. of Longfellow, 104 
New Orleans Market, Syn. of Tailby's Hybrid, 106 
New Siberian, Syn. of Siberian, 106 
New White Spine, Syn. of Klondike, 104 
New York Extra Long Perfected White Spine, Syn. of 

Evergreen White Spine, 100 
New York Market, 108 

Nichol's Green, Syn. of Nichol's Medium Green, 105 
Nichol's Medium Green, 105 
Noa's Forcing, see Fordhook Famous, 100 
None Such, 108 

Noroton Select White Spine, 111. 97; Var. 108 
Northern Beauty, 108 
Northern Market, 108 
Northwestern Beauty, 108 
Nugreen, Syn. of Famous Nugreen, 10S 

Ohio White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
O. K. Perfect Pickling, 108 

Panmure Long White, Syn. of White German, 107 

Paris Early Cluster Pickle, Syn. of Parisian Pickle, 105 

Paris Pickling, Syn. of Parisian Pickle, 105 

Parisian Pickle, 96; 111. 101; Var. 105 

Parisian Prolific Pickling, Syn. of Parisian Pickle, 105 

Pearl, 108 

Peerless, 96; Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 

Peerless Improved White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 

99 
Peerless New Orleans Market, Syn. of Tailby's Hybrid, 106 
Peerless White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 96; 111. 

102; Var. 99 
Penny Pack Valley, Syn. of Longfellow, 104 
Pera, Syn. of Giant Pera, 101 
Perfect Pickling, 108 

Perfect White Spine, Syn. of Henderson's Perfected, 102 
Perfected Arlington, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 
Perfected Davis Perfect, Syn. of Davis Perfect, 97 
Perfected Jersey Pickle, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 103 
Perfected Pickle, Syn. of Jersey Pickling, 111. 101; Var. 103 
Perfected White Spine, Syn. of Henderson's Perfected, 102 
Perfection Forcing, 108 

Perfection White Spine, Syn. of Henderson's Perfected, 102 
President, 93; Var. 105 
Pressing Perfected Pickling, 108 
Price's Hybrid, 111. 103; Var. 108 

Prickly Fruited Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 
Prickly Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 
Pride of Tennessee, 108 

Pride of the Pacific, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 
Princess, 108; see Hescrow, 102 
Prize Taker, 108 
Prolific Forcing, 108 

Prolific White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 
Prosperity, 108 

Quality, Syn. of Fojin, 100 

Rawson's Hothouse, 108 

Rawson's Improved, see Arlington White Spine, 94 

Roadside Market Wonder, 105 

Rochford Market, 108; see Geneva, 101 

Rockford Pickle, 108 

Roman, 93 

Russian, Syn. of Early Russina, 99 

Russian Gherkin, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 

Russian Netted Cluster, Syn. of Khiva, 103 

Russian Shortish Green, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 

Russian Small Early Pickling, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 



C. sativus — Continued 

St. Louis Pickling, 108 

Salad, 111. 105; Var. 106 

San Francisco Pickling, 108 

Satisfaction, 108 

Schell's Standard, 108 

Senfgurken, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

Shamrock, 108 

Short Green, Syn. of Early Frame, 98 

Short Green Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

Short Green Pickling, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Short Green Prickley, 98; Syn. of Early Short Prickley, 99 

Short Horn, 108 

Short Pickling, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Short Prickley, Syn. of Early Short Prickley, 99 

Short Prolific, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Short Prolific Pickle, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Short Prolific Pickling, Syn. of Boston Pickling, 95 

Shumway's Giant, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Siberian, 98, 100; Var. 106 

Sikkim, 93, 108 

Simon's Hot House, 108 

Small Early Russian, Syn. of Early Russian, 99 

Small Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

Small Green Pickling, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

Small West Indian Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 

107 
Smyrna, 93 
Snake, 93 

Snow's Early, Syn. of Snow's Pickling, 106 
Snow's Fancy Pickling, Syn. of Snow's Pickling, 106 
Snow's Perfected Pickling, Syn. of Snow's Pickling, 106 
Snow's Pickling, 93; 111. 100, Var. 106 
Southern Pickle, 108 
Southern Pride, 108 

Special Dark Green, Syn. of Early Fortune, 98 
Special Forcing, 108 
Special Hothouse, 108 

Special White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 
Stay Green, Syn. of Kirby, 103 
Sterling, Syn. of Klondike, 104 
Straight-8, 93; Var. 106 
Success, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 
Sunny South, Syn. of Kirby, 103 
Superior Dark Green, 108 
Surprise, 108 
Sutton's Every Day, see Hescrow, 102 

Table Queen, Syn. of Early Cluster, 98 

Tailby, Syn. of Tailby's Hybrid, 106 

Tailby's Hybrid, 93; Var. 106 

Telegraph, see Adams, 94 

Temley Hybrid, 108 

Tempey's Express Pickler, Syn. of Early Beauty, 98 

The Henderson, Syn. of Henderson's Perfected, 102 

Thorburn's Everbearing, Syn. of Everbearing, 100 

Thorburn's New Everbearing, Syn. of Everbearing, 100 

Toledo Market Evergreen White Spine, Syn. of Evergreen 

White Spine, 100 
Turkey, Syn. of Long Green Turkey, 104 
20th Century, Syn. of Davis Perfect, 97 

Unexcelled White Spine, Syn. of Early White Spine, 99 

Vadco Wonder, Syn. of Davis Perfect, 97 

Vaughan, 111. 106; Var. 106 

Veridark, 108 

Very Long Green Chinese, Syn. of China Long, 95 

Vick's Hothouse, 108 

War Club, 108 

Washington White Spine, Syn. of Arlington White Spine, 94 

West India, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

West India Burr, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

West India Gherkin, 4, 9, 93; 111. 107; Var. 107 

West Indian Gherkin, Syn. of West India Gherkin, 107 

Westerfield, Syn. of Chicago Pickling, 95 

Westerfield Chicago Pickling, Syn. of Chicago Pickling, 95 

Westerfield Pickling, Syn. of Chicago Pickling, 95 

Western Glass, 108 

White, Syn. of Salad, 106 

White Albino. Syn. of White Wonder, 107 

White Cluster, Syn. of Early Cyclone, 98 

White Dutch, 94; Syn. of White German, 107 

White German, 107 

White Japan, 108 

White Oak, Syn. of Evergreen White Spine, 100 

White Pearl, Syn. of Pearl, 108; see White Wonder, 107 

White Pera, 108 

White Prickley, 93 



INDEX 



123 



C. sativus — Continued 
White Snow, 108 

White Spanish, 108, see White Wonder, 107 
White Spine. 97, 100, 106; Syn. of Early White Spin. . 99 
White Spilled, 93; see Early White Spine, 99 
White Spined Long Green, 108 
White Spine Pickling, 108 
White Wonder, 111. 105; Var. 107 
Windemoor Wonder, see Vaughan, 106, 107 
Windsor Pickling, 111. 98; Var. 108 
Wonder, 108 
Wondergreen, 108 
Wood's Hybrid, 108 
Woodruff Hybrid, 107 
Woodruff's Wonder, 108 

XL All, 108 

sativus anglicus, 9 
Schraderianus, 10 
serotinus, 10 
umbilicatus, 10 
utilissimus, 10 
verrucosus, 10 
villosus, 10 
Vilmorinii, 9 
viridis 10 
Zapallo, 13 

Cucurbita, 3, 7, 11 
alba, 8 

Andreana, 11, 12, 13 
Anguria, 8 
aspera, 10 
asteroides. 13 
aurantia, 13 
aurantiformis, 13 
bicolor, 13 
bicorporea, 13 
caffra, 8 
califomica, 11 
Camolenga, 8 
ceratoceras, 13 
Citrullus, 8 
clodiensis, 13 
coronata, 13 
Courgero, 13 
cucumifera, 13 
digit at a, 11 
elongata, 13 
esculenta, 13 
Farinae, 13 
farinosa, 8 
fastuosa, 13 
fici folia, 3, 11, 12 
foetidissima, 11 
Galeottii, 11 
grisea, 13 
hippopera, 12 
hispid a, 8 
hybrid a, 13 
idolatrica, 7 
Lagenaria, 7 
leucantha, 7 
littoralis, 8 
macrocarpa, 12 
mammeafa, 13, 18 
marsupiiformis, 13 
maxima, 3, 11, 13, 15 

Acom, 4, 15, 16; Syn. of French Turban, 22 

Adams Favorite, 58 

Alligator, 16 

American Turban, 15; Var. 16 

Apple Skin Hubbard, 58 

Arikara, 3, 23; Var. 16 

Atlas, 16 

Autumnal Boston Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Autumnal Marrow, 15, 16, 32; Syn. of Boston Marrow, 13 

Autumnal Marrow (Vil.) Syn. of Ohio, 28 

Baby Hubbard, Syn. of Kitchenette, 25 

Banana, 15; 111. 16; Var. 16 

Banquet, 1936 intr. Oscar H. Will, Bismark, N. D., 58 

Bay State, 23; Var. 17 

Bertram, 58 

Big Jumbo, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Big Show, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Bishop's Head, Syn. of American Turban, 16 

Blight Resistant, 58 



C. maxima — Continued 

Blue Hubbard, 15; Var. 17 

Bolton, 58 

Boston Marrow, 15, 23; 111. 17; Var. 18 

Boston Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Bright Red Etampes, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Brighton, 15; Var. 18 

Butman, 19 

Buttercup, 15; Var. 19 

California Syn. of French Turban, 22 

California Field, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

California Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

California Marrow, Syn. of Ohio, 28 

Cambridge Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Chestnut, Syn. of White Chestnut, 32 

Chicago Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Chicago Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Chicago Warted Hubbard, 19 

Chili, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

Chilian Giant, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

Chinese, 58 

Cocoa, Syn. of Cocoa-nut, 20 

Cocoa-nut, 15; Var. 20 

Colvin's Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow 18 

Commodore Porter, Syn. of Valparaiso, 31 

Commodore Valparaiso, Syn. of Valparaiso, 31 

Courge Brodee Galense, Syn. of Warted Sugar Marrow, 32 

Courge d'Ohio, see Ohio, 28 

Crown, 20 

Delicious, 15, 23, 29; Var. 20 

Dunlap Early Prolific Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Early Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Early Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Early Prolific Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Early Prolific Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Enormous, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Essex, Syn. of Essex Hybrid, 21 
Essex Hardshell Turban, Syn. of Essex Hybrid, 21 
Essex Hybrid, 17, 19, 31; 111. 21; Var. 21 
Etampes, 15; Var. 21 

Etampes Bright Red Mammoth, Syn. of Etampes, 21 
Etampes Mammoth Red, Syn. of Etampes, 21 
Eureka, 58 

Extra Early Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Extra Early Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Extra Early Prolific Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Extra Early Prolific Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Mar- 
row, 18 

Faxon, 20; Var. 22 

Faxon's Brazilian, Syn. of Faxon, 22 

Faxon's New Brazilian, Syn. of Faxon, 22 

Flat Top Pie, 58 

French Olive, Syn. of Olive, 28 

French Turban, 15, 16; Var. 22 

Genesee Golden, Syn. of Golden Hubbard, 23 

Genesee Red Hubbard, Syn. of Golden Hubbard, 23 

Genuine Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Giant, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Giant of All, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Gilmore, 23 

Giraumon Turban, Syn. of French Turban, 22 

Globe Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Golden Bronze, 23 

Golden Delicious, 15; Var. 23 

Golden Hubbard, 111. 20; Var. 23 

Golden Imperial. 58 

Golden Warted Hubbard, Syn. of Golden Hubbard, 23 

Golden West Hard Shell, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Golden Yellow Mammoth, 4, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Gray Boulogne, 24 

Gray Mammoth, 58 

Great Chili, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

Green Hubbard, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 

Green Mountain, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 

Green Spanish, 58 

Green Warted Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted Hubbard, 

19 
Guesman, 58 

Handford's Cream, 58 

Hard Shelled Marrow, Syn. of Golden Hubbard, 23 

Hard Shell Warty Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted 

Hubbard, 19 
Heart o' Gold, Syn. of Knobby Leviathan, 26 
Hester, 24 



124 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



C. maxima — Continued 

Hong-nan-kona, Syn. of Red China, 29 
Honolulu, 24 

Hubbard, 4, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 31; 111. 24; Var. 24 
Hundred Weight, 26 

Improved American Turban, Syn. of Kssex Hybrid, 21 
Improved Bay State, Syn. of Bay State, 17 
Improved Boston Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Improved Crown, Syn. of Crown, 20 
Improved Hubbard, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 
Improved Lima Marrow, Syn. of Valparaiso, 31 
Improved Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Improved Marblehead, Syn. of Marblehead, 27 
Improved Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 1 8 
Improved Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Improved Prolific Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Improved Prolific Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 

18 
Improved Warren, Syn. of Warren, 31 
Iowa Standard, 58 
Ironclad, 58 

Japan Red Turban, Syn. of Red China, 29 
Japanese Turban, Syn. of Opass, 28 
Jumbo, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Jumbo Pumpkin, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

King of All the Mammoths, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
King of the Giants, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
King of the Mammoths, Syn. of Mammoths, 26 
Kitchenette, 18; Var. 25 

Kitchenette Hubbard, Syn. of Kitchenette, 25 
Knobby Leviathan, 26 

Large Boston Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Large Bright Red Etampes, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Large Bronze Montlhery, 58 

Large Green, 58 

Large Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Large Mammoth Chili, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

Large Mammoth Yellow Potiron, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Large Red Etampes, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Large Sugar, 58 

Large Warted Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted Hubbard, 

19 
Large Warted Portugal, Syn. of Knobby Leviathan, 26 
Large White, 58 

Large Yellow, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Large Yellow Chili, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 
Large Yellow Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Lee's Mammoth, 58 
Lima Cocoanut, Syn. of Valparaiso, 31 
Little Hubbard, Syn. of Kitchenette, 25 
Low's Premium Hybrid, Syn. of Essex Hybrid, 21 

Mammoth, 15; 111. 25; Var. 26 

Mammoth Bright Red Etampes, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Mammoth Chili, 16; Var. 26 

Mammoth Chili Winter, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 

Mammoth Etampes, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Mammoth $50.00, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Mammoth French, 58 

Mammoth Hubbard, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 

Mammoth King, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Mammoth Leghorn, 58 

Mammoth Prize, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Mammoth Red Etampes Marrow, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Mammoth Summit, 58 

Mammoth Warted Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted 

Hubbard, 19 
Mammoth Whale, 26 
Mammoth White, 58 

Mammoth Yellow, Syn. of Mammoth, 25 
Mammoth Yellow Chili, Syn. of Mammoth Chili, 26 
Mammoth Yellow Potiron, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Marblehead, 15, 17; 111. 28; Var. 27 
Marblehead Mammoth, Syn. of Marblehead, 27 
Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Mediterranean, 27 
Metcalf, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 
Mexican Banana, Syn. of Banana, 16 
Michigan Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Middleton Blue, 17; Var. 28 
Mill's Giant Pumpkin, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Mill's Giant Squash, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Mission, 58 

Mohawk Valley Giant, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Monster Yellow, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Morse's Marrow, see Etampes, 21 



C. maxima — Continued 

Nectarine, Syn. of Honolulu, 24 
New Alligator, Syn. of Alligator, 16 
New Atlas, Syn. of Atlas, 16 
New Brazilian, Syn. of Faxon, 22 
New Brighton, Syn. of Brighton, 18 
New Delicious Winter, Syn. of Delicious, 20 
New Eureka, Syn. of Eureka, 58 
New Hester, Syn. of Hester, 24 

New Mammoth Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted Hub- 
bard, 19 
New Mammoth Jumbo, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
New Marblehead, Syn. of Marblehead, 27 
New Marrow Pumpkin, Syn. of Etampes, 21 
New Olive, Syn. of Olive, 28 
New Red China, Syn. of Red China, 29 
New Red Hubbard, Syn. of Golden Hubbard, 23 
New Sibley, Syn. of Sibley, 30 
New Sweet Hubbard, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 
Nicaise, 58 
Noxall, 58 

Ohio, 28 

Ohio Giant, 58 

Olive, 28 

Opass, 28 

Orange, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Persian Golden Giant, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Peruvian Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Pike's Peak, Syn. of Sibley, 30 

Pincushion, 58 

Pink Banana, see Banana, 16 

Plymouth Rock, Syn. of Banana, 16 

Possum Nose, 28 

Potiron, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Premium Hybrid, 58 

Prize Potiron, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Prolific Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Prolific Orange Marrow, Syn. of Boston Marrow, 18 

Quality, 15, 19; Var. 29 
Queensland Blue, 15; Var. 29 

Red Banana, 1937 intr., Gill Bros., Portland, Oregon, 58 

Red Cardinal, Syn. of Red China, 29 

Red China, 29 

Red Etampes, Syn. of Etampes, 21 

Red Hubbard, Syn. of Golden Hubbard, 23 

Rocky Mountain, 58 

Salem Valparaiso, Syn. of Valparaiso, 31 

Select Crown, Syn. of Crown, 20 

Shamrock, Syn. of Triangle, 30 

Sibley, 30 

Small China Turban, Syn. of Red China, 29 

Small Chinese Turban Gourd, Syn. of Red China, 29 

Smooth Hubbard, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 

Southern Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 

Spanish Gourd, 58 

Stetson's Hybrid, Syn. of Wilder, 32 

Sweet Nut, 58 

Sweet Potato, Syn. of Apple-Skin Hubbard, 58 

Symmes Blue Hubbard. Syn. of Blue Hubbard, 17 

Toledo Warted Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted Hubbard, 

19 
Tree, 15; Var. 30 
Triamble, Syn. of Triangle, 30 
Triangle, 30 

True Potiron, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Turban, 4, 15; Syn. of French Turban, 22 
Turban Pumpkin, Syn. of French Turban, 22 
Turks Cap. Syn. of French Turban, 22 

Syn. of American Turban, 16; 111. 29 

Underwood Blight Resistant, 58 

Utah, Syn. of Utah Giant Field, 58 

Utah Giant Field, 58 

Utah Mammoth Field, Syn. of Utah Giant Field, 58 

Valencia, 58 

Valparaiso, 4, 15, 18. 20, 32; Var. 31 

Valparaiso Cheese, Syn. of Valparaiso, 31 

Victor, 31 

Vow Vow, 58 

Warren, 111. 32; Var. 31 

Warted Hubbard, Syn. of Chicago Warted Hubbard, 19 



INDEX 



125 



C. maxima — Continued 

Warted Marrow. Syn. of Warted Sugar Marrow, .">2 

Warted Sugar, Syn. of Warted Sugar Marrow, 32 

Warted Sugar Marrow. 32 

West India Mammoth, 58 

White Chestnut, 32 

White Hubbard, Syn. of White Chestnut, 32 

White Leghorn. 58 

Wilder. 32 

Winnebago. 3. 23; Var. 32 

Winter, Syn. of Hubbard, 24 

Winter Belle, 58 

Woodbury, 58 

Yakima Marblehead, 58 
Yellow Mammoth, Syn. of Mammoth. 26 
Yellow Monster, Syn. of Mammoth, 26 
Yellow Sibley, Syn. of Hester. 2 1 

Zapolito del Trunco, Syn. of Tree, 30 

maxima Courgero, 13 

Potiro. 13 

sylvestris, 13 

turbaniformis, 14 

viridis. 13 
melanosperma, 12 
melonaeformis, 12 
Melopepo, 13 
mixta, 12 

cyanoperizona, 12 

stenosperma. 12 
moschata, 3, 11, 12, 15; Var. of, 51 

African, 1937 intr. Kilgore Seed Co., Plant City, Fla., 58 

Big Cheese, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Bordeaux, 58 

Brother Jonathan, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 53 

Buff Pie, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Bugle Gramma, 51 

Calhoun, 51 

Canada, Syn. of Canada Crookneck, 52 

Canada Crookneck, 51: Var. 52 

Canadian Winter Crookneck, Syn. of Canada Crookneck, 52 

Carpet Bag Gourd, Syn. of Neapolitan, 55 

Cashaw, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Cashew, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Cheese, 15, 51; 111. 52; Var. 52 

Chinese Alphabet, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 

Chirimen, 51; Var. 52 

Crane-neck, see Green Striped Cushaw, 53 

Crystal Spring, 58 

Cushaw, 15; Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Cushaw Crookneck, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Early Carpet-Bag, Syn. of Early Neapolitan, 55 
Early Neapolitan, Strain of Neapolitan, 55 
Egg Plant Squash, 58 

Family, Syn. of Cheese, 52 
Finest Cheese, Syn. of Cheese, 52 
Finest Yellow Family, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Genesee Sweet Potato, Syn. of Tennessee Sweet Potato, 56 
Golden Cushaw, 51; Var. 53 
Golden Yellow, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 
Gramma, 3; Syn. of Bugle Gramma, 51 
Green Crookneck Winter, Syn. of Green Striped Crook- 
neck, 53 
Green Cushaw, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 
Green Striped Bell, Syn. of Tennessee Sweet Potato, 56 
Green Striped Cushaw, 51; 111. 53; Var. 53 

Improved Cushaw, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 53 
Improved Green Striped Cushaw, Syn. of Green Striped 

Cushaw. 53 
Improved White Cushaw, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 
Improved Winter Crookneck, Syn. of Green Striped 

Cushaw, 53 
Indiana Cornfield, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 
Indiana Field, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 

Japan Crookneck, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 
Japan Pie, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 
Japanese, Syn. of Japanese Pie. 54 
Japanese Alphabet, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 
Japanese Crookneck, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 
Japanese Pie, 51; Var. 54 



C. moschata — Continued 

Japanese Pumpkin, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 
Japanese Winter Squash, Syn. of Chirimen, 52 
Jonathan, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 

Kentucky Field, 54 

Kentucky Large Field, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 
Kentucky Mammoth, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 
Kikuza, 51; Var. 55 

Landreth Cheese, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Large Cheese, 4; Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Large Cheese Western Sweet, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Large Mammoth Yellow Cheese, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Large Sweet Cheese, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Large White Cushaw, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 

Large Winter Crookneck, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 53 

Large Yellow Crookneck, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Large Yellow Kentucky Field, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 

Long Naples, Syn. of Neapolitan. 55 

Long Naples Green Not Ribbed, Syn. of Neapolitan, 55 

Long Neapolitan, Syn. of Neapolitan, 55 

Lundgren, 58 



Mammoth Cheese, Syn. of Cheese, 52 
Mammoth Golden Crookneck, Syn. of Golden Cushaw. 
Mammoth Golden Cushaw, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 
Mammoth Kentucky Field, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 
Mammoth White Cashaw, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 
Maryland Sweet Potato, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 
Mirapoix, 58 



5J 



53 



Naples Giant, Syn. of Neapolitan, 55 

Neapolitan, 55 

New Japanese, Syn. of Japanese Pie. 54 

New Jersey Sweet Potato, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 53 

New Jonathan, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 

New Thanksgiving Pumpkin, Syn. of Calhoun, 51 

Nippon Island, Syn. of Japanese Pie, 54 

Orange Color Giant Melon, 58 

Pie Melon, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 53 
Portemanteau, Syn. of White Portmanteau, 57 
Puritan, 51; Var. 55 

Quaker Pie, 51; Var. 55 

Saikyo, 51: Var. 56 

Seminole, 56 

Striped Crookneck, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 51; 

Var. 53 
Striped Cushaw, Syn. of Green Striped Cushaw, 53 
Sweet Cheese, Syn. of Kentucky Field, 54 
Sweet Kikuza, Syn. of Kikuza, 55 
Sweet Potato, Syn. of Tennessee Sweet Potato, 56 
Sweet Pumpkin, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Tennessee. Syn. of Tennessee Sweet Potato, 56 
Tennessee Sweet Potato, 4, 51: 111. 56; Var. 56 
Thanksgiving, Syn. of Cheese, 52 
Thanksgiving Pie, Syn. of Calhoun. 51 

Syn. of Cheese, 52 
Trombone, Syn. of Bugle Gramma, 51 
Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 

Violette, 58 

Virginia Mammoth, 20, 51; Var. 57 

Virginia Sweet Potato, Syn. of Tennessee Sweet Potato, 56 

West India Pumpkin. Syn. of Cheese, 52 

White Crookneck, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 

White Cushaw, 51; Var. 57 

White Portmanteau, 57 

White Winter Crookneck, Syn. of White Cushaw, 57 

Winter Crookneck, 4, 53; Var. 57 

Yellow Cashaw, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Yellow Family, Syn. of Cheese, 52 

Yellow Winter Crookneck, Syn. of Golden Cushaw, 53 

Yokohama, 19, 51; Var. 58 
oblonga, 13 
okeechobeensis, 11, 12 
ovifera, 13 
palmata, 11 
Pepo, 3, 11, 13, 15; Var. of, 33 

Acorn, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

Alexandria, 33 



126 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Pepo — Continued 
Alsatian, 58 
Apple, 33 
Arlington Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 

Crookneck, 39 
Arlington White Bush Scallop, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 

48 
Asparagus Squash, Syn. of Italian Vegetable Marrow, 41 
Autumn Bush, Syn. of Geneva Bush, 39 

Banana, Syn. of Custard, 36 
Barbadoes Cluster, 58 

Benning Bush, Syn. of Fair's Benning White Bush, 38 
Bergen, Syn. of Green Striped Bergen, 33; Var. 41 
Best in the World, Syn. of Pen-Y-Byd, 45 
Big Tom, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Black Michigan, 33 
Black Negro, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 
Black Sugar, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 
Black Zucchini, 34 
Bohemian, Syn. of Delicata, 36 
Boston Golden Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Boston Greek, 33; Var. 34 
Boston Pie, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Brazil Sugar, Syn. of Brazilian Sugar, 35 
Brazilian, Syn. of Brazilian Sugar, 35 
Brazilian Sugar, 35 

Brazilian Sugar Gourd, Syn. of Brazilian Sugar, 35 
Bug Proof, Syn. of Sandwich Island, 45 
Bugless, Syn. of Sandwich Island, 45 

Bush Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 45 
Bush Summer Warted Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crook- 
neck, 46 

California Squash, Syn. of Sandwich Island, 45 

Canada, 4; see Connecticut Field, 36 

Canners Supreme, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Citron Bush, 58 

Citronille, Syn. of Tours, 48 

Cocoa-Nut, Syn. of Cocoanut, 35 

Cocoanut, 33, 40; Var. 35 

Cocozella, Syn. of Cocozelle, 35 

Cocozella di Napoli, Syn. of Cocozelle, 35 

Cocozelle, 35 

" Cocozelle", Used as a Syn. of Italian Vegetable Marrow, 
41 

Cocozelle Bush, Syn. of Cocozelle, 35 

Columbian, 58 

Common Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Common Yellow, 4, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Congo, 58 

Connecticut Cornfield, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Connecticut Field, 4, 15, 33; Var. 35 

Connecticut Golden Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Connecticut Yellow Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Cook's Favorite, 58 

Cow, 35 

Cream, Syn. of Perfect Gem, 45 

Cream-colored Crook -neck, Syn. of White Summer Crook- 
neck, 49 

Cream Vegetable Marrow, 58 

Crookneck, 4, 15; Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 

Custard, 33; Var. 36 

Custard Marrow, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 

Custard Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 

Cylinder Squash, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 

Cymbling, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 

Danish, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

Danish Table Queen, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

Dauphine Early Bush, 36 

Delicata, 33; Var. 36 

Der Wing, 37 

Des Moines, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

Des Moines Market, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

Dollar Squash, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 

Dow's Extra Early White Bush, Syn. of White Bush 

Scallop, 48 
Dunkard, 33; Var. 37 
Dunkard Winter, Syn. of Dunkard, 37 

Dwarf Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 
Dwarf White Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 

Earliest Prolific, 33; Var. 37 

Earliest White Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Eastern Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Early Apple, Syn. of Apple, 33 

Early Bush Scallop, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Early Bush Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crook- 
neck, 46 



Pepo — Continued 

Early Cluster, Syn. of Fair's Benning White Bush, 38 

Early Dauphine, Syn. of Dauphine Early Bush, 36 

Early Dawn, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 

Early Fordhook, Syn. of Fordhook, 38 

Early Giant Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 

Crookneck, 39 
Early Giant Summer Straightneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 

Straightneck, 39 
Early Golden Bush, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 
Early Golden Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 
Early Golden Custard, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 
Early Lemon, 58 
Early Long Warted, 58 
Early Mammoth Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Giant 

Summer Crookneck, 39 
Early Mammoth White Bush, Syn. of Mammoth White 

Bush Scallop, 43 
Early Mandan, Syn. of Mandan, 43 
Early Orange, 58 

Early Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 45 
Early Small Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Early Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Early White Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Early White Crookneck, Syn. of White Summer Crookneck, 

49 
Early Yellow Bush Scallop, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 
Egg Plant Squash, Syn. of Italian Vegetable Marrow, 41 
Egg-shaped, 58 

English Marrow, Syn. of English Vegetable Marrow, 37 
English Rotherside Orange, Syn. of Rotherside Orange, 45 
English Vegetable Marrow, 111. 33; Var. 37 
Epicure, 38 

Everbearing, Syn. of Geneva Bush, 39 
Extra Early Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Extra Early Cluster, 58 

Extra Early Dawn, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Extra Early Jersey White Bush, Syn. of White Bush 

Scallop, 48 
Extra Early Patty Pan, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Extra Early Prolific, Syn. of Earliest Prolific, 37 
Extra Large Golden Bush Scallop, Syn. of Golden Custard, 

40 
Extra Large Golden Custard, Syn. of Golden Custard, 40 

Fair's Benning White Bush, 38 

Fair's White Bush, Syn. of Farr's Benning White Bush, 38 

Flat Green, 41 ; Var. 38 

Fordhook 15, 33; 111. 38; Var. 38 

Fordhook Bush, see Fordhook, 38 

Foodhook Marrow, Syn. of Fordhook, 38 

Fordhook Oblong, Syn. of Fordhook, 38 

Fordhook White Bush, Syn. of Fordhook Bush, 38 

Fort Berthold, 33; Var. 38 

French Tours, Syn. of Tours, 48 

Gem, Syn. of Perfect Gem, 45 

Genesee Giant Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer Crook- 
neck, 39 

Geneva Bush, 39 

Georgia Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Giant Prize, Syn. of Sandwich Island, 45 

Giant Straightneck, Syn. of Giant Summer Straightneck, 39 

Giant Summer Crookneck, 39 

Giant Summer Straightneck, 33; Var. 39 

Giant White Bush Scallop, Syn. of Mammoth White Bush 
Scallop, 43 

Giant White Summer Crookneck, Syn. of White Summer 
Crookneck, 49 

Giant Yellow Summer Straightneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 
Straightneck, 39 

Gibson, 33; Var. 40 

Gold Bush, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 

Gold Oblong, Syn. of Golden Oblong, 40 

Golden Bush, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 

Golden Cluster, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50, 58 

Golden Custard, 40 

Golden Custard Yellow Bush, Syn. of Golden Custard, 40 

Golden Heart, 40 

Golden Long, Syn. of Golden Oblong, 40 

Golden Long Pie, Syn. of Golden Oblong, 40 

Golden Marrow, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Golden Oblong, 33; 111. 39; Var. 40 

Golden Russet, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 

Golden Scallop, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 

Golden Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Golden Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 

Green Bush Scalloped, 41 

Green Bush Tripoli, Syn. of Black Zucchini, 34 

Green Gem Flat, Svn. of Flat Green, 38 



INDEX 



127 



Pepo — Continued 

Green Striped Bergen, 41 

Green Striped Bush, Syn. of Green Striped Bergen, 41 

Green Summer Crookneck, 41 

Green Tinted White Bush, Syn. of Farr's Benning White 

Bush, 38 
Green Vining Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of Long Green Trail- 
ing. 4.' 
Grey Zucchini, see Zucchini, SO 

Hard Pumpkin, 58 

Hardshell, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

Illinois Beauty, 33; Var. 41 

Improved Long Island White, Syn. of Long Island White 

Bush. 42 
Improved Variegated Custard Marrow, Syn. of Variegated 

Bush Scalloped, 48 
Indiana Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Individual, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 
Iron Clad, Syn. of Black Michigan, 33 
Italian, Syn. of Zucchini, 50 

Italian Green Striped, Syn. of Italian Vegetable Marrow, 41 
Italian Rapid Bush, 41 
Italian Vegetable Marrow, 111. 42; Var. 41 

Jack o' Lantern, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Jersey White Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Jumbo Squash, Syn. of Tours, 48 

Lake Shore, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Large Common Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Large Connecticut Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Large Connecticut Yellow Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 

35 
Large Cornfield, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Large Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Large Patty Pan, Syn. of Mammoth White Bush Scallop, 43 
Large Summer Warted Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 

Crookneck, 39 
Large Sweet, 58 

Large Touraine, Syn. of Tours, 48 
Large Tours, Syn. of Tours, 48 
Large Yellow, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Lemon Scallop Bush, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 
Light White Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Little Cocoanut, Syn. of Coconut, 35 
Little Gem, Syn. of Perfect Gem, 45 
Livingston's Pie Squash, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 
London Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of English Vegetable 

Marrow, 37 
Long Cocozelle, see Cocozelle, 35 
Long Cream, Syn. of English Vegetable Marrow, 37 
Long Dark Green Bush Marrow Tripoli, Syn. of Black 

Zucchini, 34 
Long Golden Straightneck, Syn. of Giant Summer Straight- 
neck, 39 
Long Green Crookneck, Syn. of Green Summer Crookneck, 

41 
Long Green Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Green Summer 

Crookneck, 41 
Long Green Trailing, 42 
Long Island Mammoth White, Syn. of Long Island White 

Bush, 42 
Long Island White Bush, 33; Var. 42 
Long Marrow, 58 
Long White Bush Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of English 

Vegetable Marrow, 37 
Long White Trailing, 43 
Long Yellow, see Connecticut Field, 35 
Long Yellow Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 
Long Yellow Field, Syn. of Golden Oblong, 40 
Long Yellow Vegetable Marrow, 58 
Luxury Pie, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 

Mammoth Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer Crookneck, 

39 
Mammoth Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Mammoth French, Syn. of Tours, 48 
Mammoth Golden Bush, Syn. of Golden Custard, 40 
Mammoth Golden Custard, Syn. of Golden Custard, 40 
Mammoth Sugar, 58 
Mammoth Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 

Crookneck, 39 
Mammoth Tours, Syn. of Tours, 48 
Mammoth White Bush Scallop, 33; Var. 43 
Mammoth Yellow Bush Scallop, Syn. of Golden Custard, 

40 
Mammoth Yellow Custard Marrow, Syn. of Golden Cus- 
tard, 40 



C. Pepo — Continued 

Mandan, 33; 111. 43; Var. 43 

Mandarin Bush, 58 

Marrow Striped Cluster, Syn. of Green Striped Bergen, 41 

Melon, 58 

Mexican Laguna, 58 

Michigan Mammoth, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Missouri, 58 

Moore's Cream, 44 

Moore's Vegetable Cream, Syn. of Moore's Cream, 44 

Mother's Famous Pie, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Nantucket, 4, 33; Var. 44 

Nantucket Negro, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

Nantucket Pie, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

Nantucket Sugar, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

Negro, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

New Acorn, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

New Banana, Syn. of Sandwich Island, 45 

New Boston Golden Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

New Bush, Syn. of Dauphine Early Bush, 36 

New England, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

New England Pie, Syn. of Small Sugar, 40 

New Golden Oblong, Syn. of Golden Oblong, 40 

New Hampshire, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

New Pie, Syn. of Winter Luxury. 49 

New Winter Luxury, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 

New Yellow Sweet Potato Pie, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Nice, 58 

Niggerhead, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 

Oblong Shaped Fordhook, Syn. of Fordhook, 38 

Oblong Yellow, Syn. of Golden Oblong, 40 

Omaha, 33; Var. 44 

Orange, 58 

Orange Custard Marrow, 58 

Orange Winter Luxury, see Winter Luxury, 49 

Patagonia, Syn. of Patagonian, 45 

Patagonian. 33; Var. 45 

Para, Syn. of Black Michigan, 33 

Patty Pan, 15, 49 

Peerless Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of English Vegetable 

Marrow, 37 
Pen-Y-Byd, 45 

Perfect Gem, 4, 33; 111. 38; Var. 45 
Perfection Bush Scallop Patty Pan, Syn. of White Bush 

Scallop, 48 
Philadelphia, Syn. of Geneva Bush, 39 
Pie, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 
Pineapple, 33; Var. 45 
Polk, Syn. of Black Michigan, 33 
Portuguese, Syn. of Sandwich Island, 45 
Prolific Early White Bush, Syn. of Earliest Prolific, 37 
Prolific Field, 58 

Prolific Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Pure Gold, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Queen, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 
Queen Anne, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 
Queen Luxury, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 

Rapid Mandan, Syn. of Mandan, 43 

Red Field, 58 

Red Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Rhode Island Sweet, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Rice's Black Zucchini, see Black Zucchini, 34 

Rotherside Orange, 45 

Russian Queen, 58 

St. George, Syn. of Nantucket, 44 
Sandwich Island, 33; 111. 47; Var. 45 
Scallop Squash, see White Bush Scallop, 49 
Seven Years, Syn. of Patagonian, 45 
Seven Years Custard, Syn. of Patagonian, 45 
Short Cocozelle, see Cocozelle, 35 
Silver Custard, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Small Cocoanut, Syn. of Coconut, 35 
Small Florida, 58 

Small Sugar, 33, 40; 111. 46; Var. 46 
Small Sweet Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Small Yellow Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Southern Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 
Spanish Squash, Syn. of Zucchini, 50 
Standard Pie, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 
Straightneck, Syn. of Giant Summer Straightneck, 39 
Straightneck Summer, Syn. of Giant Summer Straightneck, 
39 



128 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



C. Pepo — Continued 

Strickler Giant Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Giant Summer 

Crookneck, 39 
Strickler Golden Summer Crookneck, Syn. of Giant 

Summer Crookneck, 39 
Striped Custard Marrow, Syn. of Green Striped Bergen, 41 
Striped Field, 46 
Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Sugar Pie, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Sugar Sweet, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Summer Crookneck, 111. 48; Var. 46 

Summer Golden Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 
Superba White Bush, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 
Sweet Field, 58 

Sweet Potato, Syn. of Delicata, 36 
Sweet Yellow Sugar, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 
Sweetheart, 58 

Table Dainty, 47 
Table Queen, 33: 111. 49; Var. 47 
Tender and True, 48 
Touraine, Syn. of Tours, 48 
Tours, 33; Var. 48 

Variegated Bush Scalloped. 33; Var. 48 

Variegated Patty Pan, Syn. of Variegated Bush Scalloped, 

48 
Vegetable Cream Marrow, Syn. of English Vegetable 

Marrow, 37 
Vegetable Marrow, 1 5 
Vermont Pumpkin, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Ward's Individual, Syn. of Delicata, 36 

Wesley's Cocozelle, Syn. of Black Zucchini, 34 

Western Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

White Bell. 58 

White Bush Scallop, 33; 111. 50; Var. 48 

White Patty Pan, Syn. of White Bush Scallop, 48 

White Pineapple, Syn. of Pineapple, 45 

White Summer Crookneck, 49 

White Table Queen, see Table Queen, 47 

White Trailing, Syn. of Long White Trailing, 43 

White Turban, Syn. of Pineapple, 45 

White Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of English Vegetable Mar- 
row, 37 

White Vining Vegetable Marrow, Syn. of Long White 
Trailing, 43 

White Warted Flat Custard Marrow, 58 

Winter Luxury, 33; 111. 51; Var. 49 

Winter Nut, 58 

Winter Queen, Syn. of Winter Luxury, 49 

Wood's Prolific, Syn. of Earliest Prolific, 37 

Yama, Syn. of Table Queen, 47 

Yankee, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Yankee Field, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Yankee Pie, Syn. of Connecticut Field, 35 

Yellow Bush Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 

Yellow Bush Scallop, 40; Var. 50 

Yellow Crookneck, Syn. of Summer Crookneck, 46 

Yellow Elector's Cap, Syn. of Golden Custard, 40 

Syn. of Early Yellow Bush Scallop, 
50 
Yellow Patty Pan Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 
Yellow Summer Scallop, Syn. of Yellow Bush Scallop, 50 
Yum Yum, Syn. of Small Sugar, 46 

Zucchini, 33; Var. 50 

Pepo-aspera, 8 

Pepo clypeiformis, 13 

condensa, 13 

medullosa, 13 

melonaeformis, 12 

Melopepo, 13 

moschata, 12 

oviiera, 3, 13, 14 

polymorpha, 13 

torticollis, 13 

Cucurbita 

perennis. 1 1 
pileoformis. 13 
pinnatifida. 8 
pomiformis, 13 
Potiro, 13 
pruriens, 8 
pyriformis, 7, 13 
pyrotheca, 7 
pyxidaris, 13 



Cucurbita — Continued 

radiata, 13 

radicans, 11, 12 

Rapallito, 13 

siceraria, 7 

spathularis, 12 

stellata, 13 

subierrucosa, 13 

succado, 13 

texana, 13 

tuberculosa, 13 

turbinata, 13 

turbaniformis, 14 

umigera, 13 

vacua, 8 

variegata, 13 

venosa, 13 

verrucosa, 13, 33 

villosa, 8 

v it tat a, 7 
Cucurbitaceae, 3, 5, 6 
Cucuro/reae, 6 

Currie Bros., seedsmen, Milwaukee, Wis., Var. intr. by, 81 
Curuba, 10 
Cyclanthereae, 6 
Cyclanthera pedata edulis, 6 
Cymling, 4 

D 

Daehnfeldt, L., Odense, Denmark, Var. intr. by, 97 

Dalechamps, 4 

Darragh, W. H., Plant Breeder, New South Wales, Australia, 15, 30 

Davis, Eugene, Grand Rapids, Mich., Var. orig. by, 97 

Davis, Horace B., Leoni, Jackson Co., Mich., Var. orig. by, 72 

De Candolle, A.. 4, 5 

De Giorgi Seed Co., Council Bluffs, Iowa, Var. intr. by, 98 

Dilger, — , Chicago, 111., Var. orig. by, 106 

Dodonaeus, 5 

Don, G., 5 

Dreer, Henry A., seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 42, 43, 95; Var. 

intr. by, 39, 96 
Dunkards, The, Bucks County, Pa., Var. orig. by, 37 
Dupuy & Ferguson, seedsmen, Montreal, Canada, 83, 96 



Eastwood, J. W., 87 

Ecushaws, 4 

Edwards, J. R., Rocky Ford, Colo., Var. orig. by, 68 

Engler, A., 6 

Eopepon, 7 

Erwin, A. T., Iowa Exp. Sta., Ames, Iowa, 15 

Everitt, J. A., seedsman, Indianapolis, Ind., 28 

Experimental Methods, 110 



Farr, Charles N., Var. orig. by, 38 

Faxon, M. B., Sangers, Mass., Var. intr. by, 22 

Ferry, D. M. & Co., seedsmen, Detroit, Mich., 27, 99, 105; Var. 

intr. by, 21, 24, 49, 61, 62, 64, 67, 70, 76, 79, 80, 95, 102, 105 
Ferry-Morse Seed Co., Detroit, Mich., Var. intr. by. 96, 106 
Fessenden, T. G., 98 
Fevilleae, 6 

Field, Henry, seedsman, Shenandoah, Iowa, Var. intr. by, 67, 73 
Flood, James L., 65 

Fluke. J. C, Brawley, Calif., Var. orig. by, 90 
Forbes, Alexander & Co., seedsmen, Newark, N. J., 38; Var. intr. by, 

34 
Ford, Frank & Son, seedsmen, Ravenna, O., 41, 78; Var. intr. by, 

27, 37, 39 
Frame, Paynter, — Delaware; Var. orig. by, 80 
Froscher, Richard, seedsman, New Orleans, La., 82 
Fuchius, 4 

G 

Garwood and Woodside, Rocky Ford, Colo., Var. intr. by, 76 

Gauger, John., Swink, Colo., 75, 87; Var. orig. by, 80 

Gerard, 4, 5 

Germaine Seed Co., Los Angeles, Calif.; Var. intr. by, 50 

Gherkin, 4, 9, 107 

Gill Bros., seedsmen, Portland, Oregon; Var. orig. by, 23, 49, 72, 84 

Gilmore, Melvin R., Museum of Anthropology, Univ. of Mich., 23; 

Var. disc, by, 16, 32, 38, 44 
Glossary, 110 
Goff, E. S., N. Y. State Exp. Sta., Geneva, N. Y., 15, 28, 30, 39, 53, 

57, 80, 93, 98 
Gourd, 3 

Apple, 13 

Balsam-apple, 7 

Balsam-pear, 7 

Bishop's Mitre, 13 



INDEX 



129 



Dish-cloth, 8 

Hedgehog, 9 

Malabar, 3. 12 

Nest Egg, 13 

Okeechobee, 12 

Orange, 13 

Pear, 13 

Rag, 8 

Snake, 7 

Teasel, 9 

White, 8 

White-flowered, 7 

Yellow-flowered, 13 
Gramma, 3 
Grand Junction Seed Co., Grand Junction, Colo., 75; Var. intr. by, 

104, 105 
Green, Mr. — , marketrnan, Boston, Mass., 25 
Gregory, James J. H., seedsman, Marblehead, Mass., 15, 18, 33, 

36, 41, 45, 54, 90, 94, 103, 104, 105, 106; Var. intr. by, 17, 19, 

20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 38, 40, 62, 63, 65, 70, 

78, 80, 88 
Greiner, T„ Editor, La Salle, N. Y., 71 

Griffith & Turner, seedsmen, Baltimore, Md., 88; Var. intr. by, 62 
Gros melon, 4 

Gumey Seed Co.. Yankton, S. D., Var. intr. by, 63, 69 
Gymnopetalum calyculatum, 12 

septemlobum, 8 

H 

Hale, I. D.. Brawley, Calif., Var. disc, by, 73 

Hariot, Thomas. 4 

Harris, Joseph Co., seedsmen, Coldwater, N. Y., 62, 63, 68, 71, 104; 

Var. intr. by, 29, 77, 97 
Harris, Robt. P., Philadelphia, Pa., 77; Var. intr. by, 101 
Harris, T. W., 18, 36 

Hart & Vick, seedsmen, Rochester, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 97 
Hastings, R. G., seedsman, Atlanta, Georgia, 75 
Harrison, J. J., Painesville, Ohio, Var. orig. by, 24 
Henderson, Peter & Co., seedsmen, N. Y., 48, 90, 105; Var. intr. by, 

26, 36, 40, 42, 51, 61, 62, 64, 68, 69, 73, 82, 85, 96, 102 
Hester, William, Var. orig. by, 24 
Higbee, Walter, 80 
Hodgsonia heteroclita, 6 
Hogg, James, New York City, N. Y., 58 
Hogg, Thomas, New York, N. Y., Var. disc, by, 58 
Hooker, J. D., 4 
Hovev. H. E. & Co., seedsmen, Boston, Mass., 24, 33, 34, 44, 47, 51, 

52, 66, 86, 88, 90, 99, 104 
Hubbard, Elizabeth, 24 

Hunt, William M. & Co., seedsmen. New York, N. Y.. 45 
Hymenosicyos, 9 

I 
Involucraria, 7 

Anguina, 7 
Iowa Seed Co., Des Moines, Iowa, Var. intr. by, 16, 24, 47, 55, 68, 98 
Irving, Washington, 93 
Isbell, S. M. & Co., seedsmen, Jackson, Mich., 97; Var. intr. by, 

16, 72, 78, 103 
Ives, J. M., Salem, Mass., 18 

J 

Johnson and Musser, seedsmen, Los Angeles, Calif., Var. intr. by, 64 
Johnson & Stokes, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., 63, 64, 101; Var. 
intr. by, 27, 37, 41, 49, 57, 73, 77, 78, 81, 86, 98, 100 

K 
Karivia longicinha, 8 
Kedrostis, 6 

Kilgore Seed Co., Plant City, Florida, Var. intr. by, 76, 87 
Kin, Dr. Yami, 100 

Kirby, Norval E., Philadelphia, Pa., Var. orig. by, 103 
Knight, Abe, Pasadena, Maryland, Var. orig. by, 78 



Lagenaria, 6 

circeraria, 3, 5, 7 

cochinchinensis, 7 

dasystemon, 8 

hispid a. 8 

idolatrica, 7 

Lagenaria, 7 

leucantha, 7 

microcarpa, 7 

verrucosa, 7 

virginalis, 7 

vittata, 7 

vulgaris, 7 
Landreth, D. & Co., seedsmen, Bristol, Pa., 38, 41, 45. 87; Var. intr. 

by, 61, 62, 67, 81 



Latzke, E., North Dakota Col. of Agric, Fargo, N. D., 19 

Lemon cucumber. It), 104 

Lewis, — , Pontiac, Mich., Var. orig. by, 78 

Lindholm, C. J. Seed Co., Minneapolis, Minn., /I; Var. intr. by, 

18, 25, 68, 70, 72 
Lindley, George, London, England, 60, 93 
Linnaeus, 4 
Livingston's, A. W. & Sons, seedsmen, Columbus, Ohio, 82; Var. 

intr. by, 43, 49, 57, 65, 67, 72, 78, 83, 89, 99, 105 
Lobelius, 4, 5 

Loudon, J. C, London, England. 

Lovett, Capt. Josiah, Beverly, Mass., Var. orig. by, 66 
Lovett Seed Co., Little Silver, N. J., Var. intr. by, 88 
Low, Aaron, seedsman, Essex, Mass., Var. intr. by, 17; Var. orig. 

by, 21 
Luff a, 6, 7 

aegyptiaca, 8 

amara, 8 

Cattu-Picinna, 8 

clavata, 8 

cylindrica, 3, 8 

foetid a, 8 

hederacea, 8 

insularum, 8 

Jacquinii, 8 

leiocarpa, 8 

leucosperma, 8 

Parvala, 8 

pentandra, 8 

Petola, 8 

racemosa, 8 

Satpatia, 8 

scabra, 8 

striata, 8 

sylvestris, 8 

Veitchii. 8 

vittata, 8 
Lusitanus, Amatus, 5 

M 

MacClennan, A. H., Ontario Agric. Col., Guelph. Ont., Var. orig. by, 

102 
McDaniel, E. M., Yuma, Ariz., Var. orig. by, 79 
Mclnnis, A., Ontario, Canada, Var. orig. by, 100 
M'Mahon, Bernard, seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 33, 60, 61, 66, 93, 

98, 99, 107 
Mandan Indian Tribe, 33, 43 
Marcgravius, 5 
Marrow, Vegetable, 4 

Martin, Capt. Knott, Marblehead, Mass., 24 
Mathiolus, 4 

Mature Cucumber Fruits, 111., 104 
Maule, Wm. Henry, seedsman, Philadelphia, Pa., 28, 104; Var. 

intr. by, 65, 69, 71, 75, 86, 97, 107 
Mawe & Abercrombie, 60, 93, 96, 98, 99, 104, 107 
Maximas, 3, 4, 15 
May cocks, 3, 4 

Melodew Company, Rocky Ford, Colo., Var. intr. by, 80 
Melo sativus, 10 
Melons, 4, 10, 61 

Apple, 10 

Chinese Preserving, 8 

Coyote, 11 

Dudaim, 10 

Mango, 10 

Musk, for varieties see under Cucumis Melo reticulatus, 61 

Orange, 10 

Oriental Pickling, 10 

Pomegranate, 10 

Preserving, 9 

Queen Anne's Pocket, 10 

Rock, 60 

Snake, 10 

Winter, 10, 64, 75, 86 
Melothria, 6 
Melothrieae, 6 
Methods, 110 

Meyer Seed Co., Baltimore, Md., Var. intr. by, 79 
Meyer-Stisson Seed Co., Baltimore, Md., Var. intr. by, 97 
Miller, John D., Elmira, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 80 
Miller, Phillip, 93 
Millions, 3 

Minnesota State Hort. Soc, Var. intr. by, 25 
Minnesota Col. of Agr., St. Paul, Minn., Var. intr. by, 18, 25 
Mock Orange, 1 1 
Molena, 18 
Momordica, 6 

anthelmintica, 7 

Balsamina, 7 

carinata, 8 



130 



THE VEGETABLES OF NEW YORK 



Charantia, 3, 7 

chinensis, 7 

cylindrica, 8 

dasycarpa, 9 

elegans, 7 

gariepensis, 7 

indica, 7 

Jagorana, 7 

Janata, 9 

Luffa, 8 

reticulata, 8 

sativa, 10 

sinensis, 7 
Mony, Mrs. T. P., Oakland, Calif., Var. orig. by, 106 
Moore, Thomas, Sec. Royal Hort. Soc, London, England, Var. intr. 

by, 44 
Morse, C. C. & Co., San Francisco, Calif., Var. intr. by, 85 
Morrill, Roland, Benton Harbor, Mich., Var. orig. by, 74, 84, 85; 

Var. intr. by, 74 
Moschatas, 3, 4, 15, 51 
Muricia, 7 

Museum of Natural History, Paris, France, 29 
Muskmelons, 

Classifications and Keys, 9, 10, 60 

History, Botanical, 4 
History, Horticultural, 60 

Obscure varieties of, 91 

References for, 91, 92 

Varieties of, 61 
Musser, H. L., seedsman, Los Angeles, Calif., Var. orig. by, 16 

N 

Naudin, Charles, 10, 93 

Navlet, Chas. C, San Jose, Calif., Var. intr. by, 80 

Neurosperma, 7 

cuspidata, 7 
Neurospermum, 7 
Nevrosperma, 7 
Newhall, Josiah, Var. orig. by, 24 

New York State Exp. Sta., Geneva, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 101 
Nicholson, Robert, seedsman, Dallas, Texas, 75 
Nixon, Major John W., Augusta, Georgia, Var. orig. by, 82 
Northrup, Braslan & Goodwin, seedsmen, Minneapolis, Minn., Var. 

intr. by, 106 
Norton, J. B., U. S. D. A., Washington, D. C, Var. orig. by, 76 

o 

Omaha Indian Tribe, 33, 44 

Oriental Seed Co., San Francisco, Calif., Var. intr. by, 55 56, 101 

Owen, A. P., Mickleton, N. J., Var. orig. by, 70 

Ozodycus, 11 

perennis, 11 

P 

Palladius, 5 

Pangolo, 13 

Parker, W. H., Arlington, Texas, Var. orig. by, 75 

Parodi, L. R., 3 

Pepo, 11 

Citrullus, 13 

eximius, 12 

fici folia, 12 

foetidissima, 11 

Lagenarius, 7 

macrocarpus, 13 

malabaricus, 12 

maximus, 13 

Melopepo, 13 

moschatus. 12 

ocheechobeensis, 12 

Potiro, 13 

pyridaris, 13 

verrucosus, 13 

vulgaris, 13 

Pepos, 3, 4, 33 

Perry, Commodore, 60; Var. intr. by, 90 

Pileocalyx, 1 1 

elegans, 14 
Platygonia, 7 
Polakowskia tacaco, 6 

Pollock, J. P., Holbrook, Colo., Var. orig. by, 86 
Pompions, 3 
Poppy a, 8 

Fabiana, 8 
Porter, Commodore, 18; Var. intr. by, 31 



Preserving Melon, 9 

Price 8s Knickerbocker, seedsmen, Albany N. Y., Var. intr. by, 89 

Prince Seed Co., New York, N. Y., 102 

Pumpions, 3 

Pumpkins, 

Classifications and Keys, 11, 12, 13, 15 

History, Botanical, 3, 4 
History, Horticultural, 15 

Obscure varieties of, 58 

References for, 59 

Varieties of, 16, 33, 51 



Quaasien, 3, 49 

Quakers, Washington Co., N. Y., 55 

R 

Rand, E. S., 22 

Rane, F. W., New Hampshire Agr. Exp. Sta., 61 

Rawson, W. W., Arlington, Mass., 103, Var. orig. by, 94 

Ray, John, 4 

Reuter Seed Co., New Orleans, La., 82 

Rice, Jerome B„ Seed Co., Cambridge, N. Y., Var. intr. by. 34, 68, 98, 

104 
Richards, E. M., Dedham, Mass., 20 
Richardson, F. W., Hicksville, Ohio, Var. orig. by, 75 
Richardson, G. A., Ocala, Fla., 76 
Rigocarpus, 9 
Rio, 3 

Rixford, G. P., 65 
Robinson, J. C. & Co., seedsmen, Waterloo, Nebr., 99, Var. orig. by, 

96 
Robinson, W., London, England, 55, 75 
Rocky Ford Cantaloupe Seed Breeders' Assoc, Rocky Ford, Colo., 

Var. intr. by, 74, 86, 87 
Rosa, J. T., melon breeder, 61 

Rose, Paul, South Frankford, Mich., Var. orig. by, 76, 85 
Rose, William, Var. orig. by, 84 

Ross Bros., seedsmen, Wichita, Kan., Var. intr. by, 68 
Ross Seed Co., Boston, Mass., 65 

Routledge Seed & Floral Co., Portland, Oregon, Var. orig. by, 102 
Russel, J. B., seedsman, Boston, Mass., 15, 22 
Ryan, James B., Rocky Ford, Colo., 74, 90; Var. orig. by, 86, 87 



St. Louis Seed Co., St. Louis, Mo., Var., intr. by, 66 

Schell, Walter S., Inc., seedsmen, Harrisburg, Pa., Var. intr. by, 105 

Schramm Bros., — Md., Var. orig. by, 64 

Sechium edule, 6 

Seminole Indian Tribe, 51, 56 

Seringe, 9 

Shoemaker, D. M., U. S. D. A., Washington, D. C, 75 

Shumway, R. H., Rockford, 111., seedsman. Var. intr. by, 67, 88 

Sibley, Hiram & Co., seedsmen, Rochester, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 21 , 30 

Sicana, 7 

odor if era, 10 
Sicyoideae, 6 
Sicyos Fauriei, 7 
Simnels, 4 

Simon, J. N., & Son, seedsmen, Philadelphia, Pa., Var. intr. by, 103 
Sinclair 8s Moore, seedsmen, 52 
Sitroules, 49 
Sloane, Sir Hans, 4 

Snow, J. C, Rockford, 111., Var. orig. by, 106 
Speer, — Mr., Albany, Oregon, Var. orig. by, 84 
Sphenantha, 11 

scabra, 12 

scandens, 12 
Squashes, 

Classifications and Keys, 11, 12, 13, 15 

History, Botanical, 3, 4 

History, Horticultural, 15 

Obscure varieties of, 58 

References for, 59 

Varieties of, 16, 33, 51 

Squonter-squashes, 48 

Stanley, Capt. Sam., Marblehead, Mass., 27 

Stark Bros., nurserymen, Louisiana, Mo., Var. intr. by, 71 

Starn, E. N., Fairton, New Jersey, Var. orig. by, 65 

Starr, George B., Cambridge, N. Y., Var. orig. by. 98, 105 

State Nursery & Seed Co., Helena, Mont., Var. intr. by, 63 

Stetson, A. W., Braintree, Mass., Var. orig. by, 32 



INDEX 



131 



Stillman, Dr. J. D. B., 65 

Stokes, Walter P., Moorestown, N. J., 78; Var. intr. by, 107 

Sturtevant. E. Lewis, N. Y. State Exp. Sta., Geneva, N. Y., 4, 5, 

15. 49, 66. 93 
Suttons & Sons, seedsmen, Reading, England, 45; Var. intr. by, 47, 48 
Stump 6t Walter, seedsmen. New York, N. Y., 42, 43 
Sullivan, General, 93 

Symmes, S. S., Cliftondale. Mass., Var. orig. by, 17 
Symnels, 4, 49 



Tacaco, 6 

Tailby, Joseph, Wellesley, Mass., Var. orig. by, 106 

Tait & Sons, George, Norfolk, Va., Var. intr. by, 62, 64, 66, 76, 78 

Telfairea, 6 

Templin, L.. Calla, Ohio, Var. intr. by, 67 

Thorbura, Grant, seedsman. New York City, N. Y.. 4. 15, 20, 24, 33, 

45, 47. 51, 52, 55. 60, 66, 70, 86, 99, 103, 104; Var. intr. by, 37, 

62, 78, 100 
Tillinghast Seed Co., La Conner, Wash., Var. intr. by, 29 
Titus, Adelbert, Irondequoit, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 97 
Tracy, W. W., U. S. D. A., Washington, D. C, 45 
Tragus, 4 
Trichosanthes, 6 

Anguina, 3, 7 

colubrina. 7 
Trichosanthos, 7 
Trevauxia. 7 
Trevouxia, 7 
Tristemon, 11 

texanum, 13 
Turia, 7 

cordata. 8 

cylindrica, 8 
Tye, Otis, Yucca, N D., Var. orig. by, 89 



Vaviloff, 3 

Vi gi 'ible Marrow, 4. 37, 41 

Vegetable-Orange, 10 

V i able Sponge, 10 

Vine-Peach, 10 

Vick, James, seedsman, Rochester, N. Y., Var. intr. by, 21, 77, 95 

Vilmorin-Andricux & Co., seedsmen, Paris, France, 15, 28, 32, 39, 

41, 48, 57, 60, 75, 93, 99 
Vine Peach, 10 
Voorhees, Wm. G., Benzie Co., Mich., Var. orig. by, 69 

W 

Walwrath, H. J., Conneaut, Ohio, Var. orig. and intr. by, 71, 78 
Warren, Mr., Marblehead, Mass., Var. orig. by, 31 
Watermelon, 5, 8 

bitter, 9 
Waugh & Thompson, 93 
Wellington, R., State Exp. Sta., Geneva, N. Y., Var. orig. by, 18, 25, 

101 
Winter melons, 64, 75, 86, see muskmelons, 61 
Wilder, Hon. Marshall P., 32 
Will. Geo. F., Bismarck, N. D., 47 
Will, Oscar H. & Co., seedsmen, Bismarck, N. D., Var. intr. by, 

16, 19, 23, 32, 38, 43, 44, 84, 89 
Wilson, G. H., seedsman, Downs, Kansas, Var. intr. by, 72 
Wilson, Samuel, seedsman, Mechanicsville, Pa., 28, Var. intr. by, 54, 

104 
Winnebago Indian Tribe, 3, 23, 32 

Woodruff, F. H. & Sons, seedsmen, Milford, Conn., Var. intr. by, 107 
Woods, T. W. & Sons, seedsmen, Richmond, Va., Var. intr. by, 37, 

57, 69, 74 
Woodside Seed Growers, Rocky Ford, Colo., 80 



Yates, Arthur & Co., seedsmen, Sydney, Australia, 30, 96 
Yeager, A. F., N. D. Col. of Agr., Fargo, N. D., Var. orig. by, 19 



Van Orman. F. B.. Iowa, 30; Var. orig. by, 33 

Vaughan Seed Store, Chicago, 111., 33, 81, 87, 88; Var. intr. by, 20, ! 

22, 39, 40, 65, 76, 84, 85, 87, 95, 100, 102, 106 1 Zucca, 7 



N«w Vor» Botanical Card.n Ul 
II II 



3 5185 00230 7245 



BOUND TO f*-E*S£ 



'^■C:^ N MANCHESTER. 
K. INDIANA 



